



Network File System Version 4                                  T. Haynes
Internet-Draft                                               Hammerspace
Intended status: Standards Track                           21 April 2026
Expires: 23 October 2026


           Parallel NFS (pNFS) Flexible File Layout Version 2
                 draft-haynes-nfsv4-flexfiles-v2-latest

Abstract

   Parallel NFS (pNFS) allows a separation between the metadata (onto a
   metadata server) and data (onto a storage device) for a file.  The
   Flexible File Layout Type Version 2 is defined in this document as an
   extension to pNFS that allows the use of storage devices that require
   only a limited degree of interaction with the metadata server and use
   already-existing protocols.  Data protection is also added to provide
   integrity.  Both Client-side mirroring and the Erasure Coding
   algorithms are used for data protection.

Note to Readers

   Discussion of this draft takes place on the NFSv4 working group
   mailing list (nfsv4@ietf.org), which is archived at
   https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/search/?email_list=nfsv4.  Source
   code and issues list for this draft can be found at
   https://github.com/ietf-wg-nfsv4/flexfiles-v2.

   Working Group information can be found at https://github.com/ietf-wg-
   nfsv4.

   This draft is currently a work in progress.  It needs to be
   determined if we want to copy v1 text to v2 or if we want just a diff
   of the new content.  For right now, we are copying the v1 text and
   adding the new v2 text.  Also, expect sections to move as we push the
   emphasis from flex files to protection types.

   _As a WIP, the XDR extraction may not yet work._

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 23 October 2026.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2026 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
   2.  Motivation
   3.  Use Cases
   4.  Definitions
   5.  Requirements Language
   6.  Coupling of Storage Devices
     6.1.  LAYOUTCOMMIT
     6.2.  Fencing Clients from the Storage Device
       6.2.1.  Implementation Notes for Synthetic uids/gids
       6.2.2.  Example of using Synthetic uids/gids
     6.3.  State and Locking Models
       6.3.1.  Loosely Coupled Locking Model
       6.3.2.  Tightly Coupled Locking Model
     6.4.  Tight Coupling Control Protocol
       6.4.1.  Capability Discovery
       6.4.2.  Control Session
       6.4.3.  Flow at LAYOUTGET
       6.4.4.  Principal Binding and the Kerberos Gap
       6.4.5.  Client-Detected Trust Gap
       6.4.6.  Lease and Renewal
       6.4.7.  Storage Device Crash Recovery
       6.4.8.  Metadata Server Crash Recovery
       6.4.9.  Backward Compatibility
   7.  XDR Description of the Flexible File Layout Type
   8.  Device Addressing and Discovery
     8.1.  ff_device_addr4
     8.2.  Storage Device Multipathing
   9.  Flexible File Version 2 Layout Type
     9.1.  ffv2_coding_type4
       9.1.1.  Encoding Type Interoperability
     9.2.  ffv2_layout4
       9.2.1.  ffv2_flags4
     9.3.  ffv2_file_info4
     9.4.  ffv2_ds_flags4
     9.5.  ffv2_data_server4
     9.6.  ffv2_coding_type_data4
     9.7.  ffv2_key4
     9.8.  ffv2_mirror4
     9.9.  ffv2_layout4
     9.10. ffv2_data_protection4
     9.11. ffv2_layouthint4
       9.11.1.  Error Codes from LAYOUTGET
       9.11.2.  Client Interactions with FF_FLAGS_NO_IO_THRU_MDS
     9.12. LAYOUTCOMMIT
     9.13. Interactions between Devices and Layouts
     9.14. Handling Version Errors
   10. Striping via Sparse Mapping
   11. Recovering from Client I/O Errors
   12. Client-Side Protection Modes
     12.1.  Client-Side Mirroring
       12.1.1.  Selecting a Mirror
       12.1.2.  Writing to Mirrors
       12.1.3.  Metadata Server Resilvering of the File
     12.2.  Erasure Coding
       12.2.1.  Encoding a Data Block
       12.2.2.  Decoding a Data Block
       12.2.3.  Write Modes
       12.2.4.  Selecting the Repair Client
       12.2.5.  Repair Protocol: Normative vs. Informative
       12.2.6.  Carrying Out the Repair
       12.2.7.  Reading Chunks
       12.2.8.  Whole File Repair
     12.3.  Mixing of Coding Types
     12.4.  Reed-Solomon Vandermonde Encoding
            (FFV2_ENCODING_RS_VANDERMONDE)
       12.4.1.  Overview
       12.4.2.  Galois Field Arithmetic
       12.4.3.  Encoding Matrix
       12.4.4.  Encoding
       12.4.5.  Decoding
       12.4.6.  RS Interoperability Requirements
       12.4.7.  RS Shard Sizes
     12.5.  Mojette Transform Encoding
            (FFV2_ENCODING_MOJETTE_SYSTEMATIC,
            FFV2_ENCODING_MOJETTE_NON_SYSTEMATIC)
       12.5.1.  Overview
       12.5.2.  Grid Structure
       12.5.3.  Directions
       12.5.4.  Forward Transform (Encoding)
       12.5.5.  Katz Reconstruction Criterion
       12.5.6.  Inverse Transform (Decoding)
       12.5.7.  Systematic Mojette
       12.5.8.  Non-Systematic Mojette
       12.5.9.  Mojette Shard Sizes
     12.6.  Comparison of Encoding Types
     12.7.  First-Line Substitution to a Spare
     12.8.  Handling write holes
   13. System Model and Correctness
     13.1.  Actors and Roles
     13.2.  Failure Model
     13.3.  Consistency Guarantees
     13.4.  Progress and Termination
     13.5.  Relation to Classical Consensus
     13.6.  Non-Goals
   14. NFSv4.2 Operations Allowed to Data Files
   15. Flexible File Layout Type Return
     15.1.  I/O Error Reporting
       15.1.1.  ff_ioerr4
     15.2.  Layout Usage Statistics
       15.2.1.  ff_io_latency4
       15.2.2.  ff_layoutupdate4
       15.2.3.  ff_iostats4
     15.3.  ff_layoutreturn4
   16. Flexible File Layout Type LAYOUTERROR
   17. Flexible File Layout Type LAYOUTSTATS
   18. Flexible File Layout Type Creation Hint
   19. ff_layouthint4
   20. Recalling a Layout
     20.1.  CB_RECALL_ANY
   21. Client Fencing
   22. New NFSv4.2 Error Values
     22.1.  Error Definitions
       22.1.1.  NFS4ERR_CODING_NOT_SUPPORTED (Error Code 10097)
       22.1.2.  NFS4ERR_PAYLOAD_NOT_CONSISTENT (Error Code 10098)
       22.1.3.  NFS4ERR_CHUNK_LOCKED (Error Code 10099)
       22.1.4.  NFS4ERR_CHUNK_GUARDED (Error Code 10100)
       22.1.5.  NFS4ERR_PAYLOAD_LOST (Error Code 10101)
     22.2.  Operations and Their Valid Errors
     22.3.  Callback Operations and Their Valid Errors
     22.4.  Errors and the Operations That Use Them
   23. EXCHGID4_FLAG_USE_PNFS_DS
   24. New NFSv4.2 Attributes
     24.1.  Attribute 89: fattr4_coding_block_size
   25. New NFSv4.2 Common Data Structures
     25.1.  chunk_guard4
       25.1.1.  Reserved cg_client_id Value: CHUNK_GUARD_CLIENT_ID_MDS
     25.2.  chunk_owner4
   26. New NFSv4.2 Operations
     26.1.  Operation 77: CHUNK_COMMIT - Activate Cached Chunk Data
       26.1.1.  ARGUMENTS
       26.1.2.  RESULTS
       26.1.3.  DESCRIPTION
     26.2.  Operation 78: CHUNK_ERROR - Report Error on Cached Chunk
             Data
       26.2.1.  ARGUMENTS
       26.2.2.  RESULTS
       26.2.3.  DESCRIPTION
     26.3.  Operation 79: CHUNK_FINALIZE - Transition Chunks from
             Pending to Finalized
       26.3.1.  ARGUMENTS
       26.3.2.  RESULTS
       26.3.3.  DESCRIPTION
     26.4.  Operation 80: CHUNK_HEADER_READ - Read Chunk Header from
             File
       26.4.1.  ARGUMENTS
       26.4.2.  RESULTS
       26.4.3.  DESCRIPTION
     26.5.  Operation 81: CHUNK_LOCK - Lock Cached Chunk Data
       26.5.1.  ARGUMENTS
       26.5.2.  RESULTS
       26.5.3.  DESCRIPTION
     26.6.  Operation 82: CHUNK_READ - Read Chunks from File
       26.6.1.  ARGUMENTS
       26.6.2.  RESULTS
       26.6.3.  DESCRIPTION
     26.7.  Operation 83: CHUNK_REPAIRED - Confirm Repair of Errored
             Chunk Data
       26.7.1.  ARGUMENTS
       26.7.2.  RESULTS
       26.7.3.  DESCRIPTION
     26.8.  Operation 84: CHUNK_ROLLBACK - Rollback Changes on Cached
             Chunk Data
       26.8.1.  ARGUMENTS
       26.8.2.  RESULTS
       26.8.3.  DESCRIPTION
     26.9.  Operation 85: CHUNK_UNLOCK - Unlock Cached Chunk Data
       26.9.1.  ARGUMENTS
       26.9.2.  RESULTS
       26.9.3.  DESCRIPTION
     26.10. Operation 86: CHUNK_WRITE - Write Chunks to File
       26.10.1.  ARGUMENTS
       26.10.2.  RESULTS
       26.10.3.  DESCRIPTION
     26.11. Operation 87: CHUNK_WRITE_REPAIR - Write Repaired Cached
             Chunk Data
       26.11.1.  ARGUMENTS
       26.11.2.  RESULTS
       26.11.3.  DESCRIPTION
     26.12. Operation 88: TRUST_STATEID - Register Layout Stateid on
             Data Server
       26.12.1.  ARGUMENTS
       26.12.2.  RESULTS
       26.12.3.  DESCRIPTION
       26.12.4.  RESPONSE CODES
     26.13. Operation 89: REVOKE_STATEID - Revoke Registered Stateid
             on Data Server
       26.13.1.  ARGUMENTS
       26.13.2.  RESULTS
       26.13.3.  DESCRIPTION
       26.13.4.  RESPONSE CODES
     26.14. Operation 90: BULK_REVOKE_STATEID - Revoke All Stateids
             for a Client
       26.14.1.  ARGUMENTS
       26.14.2.  RESULTS
       26.14.3.  DESCRIPTION
       26.14.4.  RESPONSE CODES
   27. New NFSv4.2 Callback Operations
     27.1.  Callback Operation 16: CB_CHUNK_REPAIR - Request Repair of
            Inconsistent Chunk Ranges
       27.1.1.  ARGUMENTS
       27.1.2.  RESULTS
       27.1.3.  DESCRIPTION
       27.1.4.  Response Codes
   28. Security Considerations
     28.1.  CRC32 Integrity Scope
     28.2.  Chunk Lock and Lease Expiry
     28.3.  Error Code Information Disclosure
     28.4.  Transport Layer Security
     28.5.  RPCSEC_GSS and Security Services
       28.5.1.  Loosely Coupled
       28.5.2.  Tightly Coupled
   29. IANA Considerations
   Implementation Status
     reffs (MDS and DS) and ec_demo (Client)
     Interoperability and Benchmarks
   Design Rationale: Rejected Alternatives
     Proprietary Projection Header Inside Opaque Payload
     Per-Client Swap Files with MDS MAPPING_RECALL
     Server-Side Byte-Range Lock Manager per File
     Modified Two-Touch Paxos on Each Chunk
     Automatic Commit of Empty Chunks
     Global Clock or Wall-Clock-Based Generation Counter
   Acknowledgments
   References
     Normative References
     Informative References
   Author's Address

1.  Introduction

   In Parallel NFS (pNFS) (see Section 12 of [RFC8881]), the metadata
   server returns layout type structures that describe where file data
   is located.  There are different layout types for different storage
   systems and methods of arranging data on storage devices.  [RFC8435]
   defined the Flexible File Version 1 Layout Type used with file-based
   data servers that are accessed using the NFS protocols: NFSv3
   [RFC1813], NFSv4.0 [RFC7530], NFSv4.1 [RFC8881], and NFSv4.2
   [RFC7862].

   To provide a global state model equivalent to that of the files
   layout type, a back-end control protocol might be implemented between
   the metadata server and NFSv4.1+ storage devices.  An implementation
   can either define its own proprietary mechanism or it could define a
   control protocol in a Standards Track document.  The requirements for
   a control protocol are specified in [RFC8881] and clarified in
   [RFC8434].

   The control protocol described in this document is based on NFS.  It
   does not provide for knowledge of stateids to be passed between the
   metadata server and the storage devices.  Instead, the storage
   devices are configured such that the metadata server has full access
   rights to the data file system and then the metadata server uses
   synthetic ids to control client access to individual data files.

   In traditional mirroring of data, the server is responsible for
   replicating, validating, and repairing copies of the data file.  With
   client-side mirroring, the metadata server provides a layout that
   presents the available mirrors to the client.  The client then picks
   a mirror to read from and ensures that all writes go to all mirrors.
   The client only considers the write transaction to have succeeded if
   all mirrors are successfully updated.  In case of error, the client
   can use the LAYOUTERROR operation to inform the metadata server,
   which is then responsible for the repairing of the mirrored copies of
   the file.

   This client side mirroring provides for replication of data but does
   not provide for integrity of data.  In the event of an error, a user
   would be able to repair the file by silvering the mirror contents.
   I.e., they would pick one of the mirror instances and replicate it to
   the other instance locations.

   However, lacking integrity checks, silent corruptions are not able to
   be detected and the choice of what constitutes the good copy is
   difficult.  This document updates the Flexible File Layout Type to
   version 2 by providing error-detection integrity (CRC32) for erasure
   coding.  Data blocks are transformed into a header and a chunk.  It
   introduces new operations that allow the client to rollback writes to
   the data file.

   Using the process detailed in [RFC8178], the revisions in this
   document become an extension of NFSv4.2 [RFC7862].  They are built on
   top of the external data representation (XDR) [RFC4506] generated
   from [RFC7863].

   This document defines LAYOUT4_FLEX_FILES_V2, a new and independent
   layout type that coexists with the Flexible File Layout Type version
   1 (LAYOUT4_FLEX_FILES, [RFC8435]).  The two layout types are NOT
   backward compatible: an FFv2 layout cannot be parsed as an FFv1
   layout and vice versa.  A server MAY support both layout types
   simultaneously; a client selects the desired layout type in its
   LAYOUTGET request.

2.  Motivation

   Server-sided erasure coding places the erasure-coding compute at the
   server, which becomes a bottleneck as the number of concurrent
   clients grows.  Moving the erasure transform to the client
   parallelizes the compute across all writers: each client encodes
   locally and fans out the resulting chunks to the data servers
   directly, keeping the metadata server in its coordinator role for
   metadata rather than making it a data-path funnel.

   Flex Files v1 ([RFC8435]) already places the replication transform at
   the client via client-side mirroring, but mirroring provides no
   integrity check: silent byte corruption is undetectable, and
   repairing a damaged mirror requires choosing a trusted copy
   essentially blind.  Flex Files v2 adds two integrity mechanisms -- a
   per-chunk CRC32 for on-wire and at-rest bit-flip detection, and the
   chunk_guard4 compare-and-swap primitive (see Section 25.1) for
   detecting concurrent-writer inconsistency -- while preserving the
   client-side compute model.

3.  Use Cases

   The protocol is designed around three workload classes.  The
   percentages below reflect the expected deployment mix in
   installations that choose Flex Files v2 for its combination of
   integrity and performance; individual deployments may diverge.

   Single writer, multiple readers (approximately 90% of expected

   deployments):  The common case is a file written by one client and
      subsequently read by many.  Examples include artifacts deposited
      by batch jobs, container images, and media files.  The protocol is
      optimized for this case; see Section 13.4.

   Multiple writers without sustained contention (approximately 9% of

   expected deployments):  Files with multiple concurrent writers where
      races on the same chunk are rare.  Examples include shared-
      directory append-only logs and distributed builds.  The
      chunk_guard4 CAS primitive and per-chunk locking cover this case
      without penalizing the common single-writer path.

   Multiple writers with high-frequency contention, no overwrite

   (approximately 1% of expected deployments):  High-performance
      computing (HPC) checkpoint workloads, in which many ranks write
      disjoint regions of the same file in lockstep.  The protocol
      relies on block alignment to keep per-chunk contention rare
      despite overall high writer count.  Contention that does occur is
      resolved via the deterministic tiebreaker rule defined in
      Section 25.1.

   Scale targets include multi-thousand-client deployments (on the order
   of tens of thousands of concurrent clients for HPC checkpointing),
   parallel-filesystem replacements, and multi-rack shared-storage
   clusters.  The repair protocol (see Section 12.2.4) is designed to
   let such deployments tolerate data-server failures and concurrent-
   writer races without blocking the critical path for the first two
   workload classes.

4.  Definitions

   chunk:  One of the resulting chunks to be exchanged with a data
      server after a transformation has been applied to a data block.
      The resulting chunk may be a different size than the data block.

   control communication requirements:  the specification for
      information on layouts, stateids, file metadata, and file data
      that must be communicated between the metadata server and the
      storage devices.  There is a separate set of requirements for each
      layout type.

   control protocol:  the particular mechanism that an implementation of
      a layout type would use to meet the control communication
      requirement for that layout type.  This need not be a protocol as
      normally understood.  In some cases, the same protocol may be used
      as a control protocol and storage protocol.

   client-side mirroring:  a feature in which the client, not the
      server, is responsible for updating all of the mirrored copies of
      a layout segment.

   data block:  A block of data in the client's cache for a file.

   data file:  The data portion of the file, stored on the data server.

   replication of data:  Data replication is making and storing multiple
      copies of data in different locations.

   Erasure Coding:  A data protection scheme where a block of data is
      replicated into fragments and additional redundant fragments are
      added to achieve parity.  The new chunks are stored in different
      locations.

   Client Side Erasure Coding:  A file based integrity method where
      copies are maintained in parallel.

   (file) data:  that part of the file system object that contains the
      data to be read or written.  It is the contents of the object
      rather than the attributes of the object.

   data server (DS):  a pNFS server that provides the file's data when
      the file system object is accessed over a file-based protocol.

   fencing:  the process by which the metadata server prevents the
      storage devices from processing I/O from a specific client to a
      specific file.

   file layout type:  a layout type in which the storage devices are
      accessed via the NFS protocol (see Section 5.12.4 of [RFC8881]).

   gid:  the group id, a numeric value that identifies to which group a
      file belongs.

   layout:  the information a client uses to access file data on a
      storage device.  This information includes specification of the
      protocol (layout type) and the identity of the storage devices to
      be used.

   layout iomode:  a grant of either read-only or read/write I/O to the
      client.

   layout segment:  a sub-division of a layout.  That sub-division might
      be by the layout iomode (see Sections 3.3.20 and 12.2.9 of
      [RFC8881]), a striping pattern (see Section 13.3 of [RFC8881]), or
      requested byte range.

   layout stateid:  a 128-bit quantity returned by a server that
      uniquely defines the layout state provided by the server for a
      specific layout that describes a layout type and file (see
      Section 12.5.2 of [RFC8881]).  Further, Section 12.5.3 of
      [RFC8881] describes differences in handling between layout
      stateids and other stateid types.

   layout type:  a specification of both the storage protocol used to
      access the data and the aggregation scheme used to lay out the
      file data on the underlying storage devices.

   loose coupling:  when the control protocol is a storage protocol.

   (file) metadata:  the part of the file system object that contains
      various descriptive data relevant to the file object, as opposed
      to the file data itself.  This could include the time of last
      modification, access time, EOF position, etc.

   metadata server (MDS):  the pNFS server that provides metadata
      information for a file system object.  It is also responsible for
      generating, recalling, and revoking layouts for file system
      objects, for performing directory operations, and for performing
      I/O operations to regular files when the clients direct these to
      the metadata server itself.

   mirror:  a copy of a layout segment.  Note that if one copy of the
      mirror is updated, then all copies must be updated.

   non-systematic encoding:  An erasure coding scheme in which the
      encoded shards do not contain verbatim copies of the original
      data.  Every read requires decoding, even when no shards are lost.
      The Mojette non-systematic transform is an example.  Non-
      systematic encodings are typically used for archival workloads
      where reads are infrequent.

   recalling a layout:  a graceful recall, via a callback, of a specific
      layout by the metadata server to the client.  Graceful here means
      that the client would have the opportunity to flush any WRITEs,
      etc., before returning the layout to the metadata server.

   revoking a layout:  an invalidation of a specific layout by the
      metadata server.  Once revocation occurs, the metadata server will
      not accept as valid any reference to the revoked layout, and a
      storage device will not accept any client access based on the
      layout.

   resilvering:  the act of rebuilding a mirrored copy of a layout
      segment from a known good copy of the layout segment.  Note that
      this can also be done to create a new mirrored copy of the layout
      segment.

   rsize:  the data transfer buffer size used for READs.

   stateid:  a 128-bit quantity returned by a server that uniquely
      defines the set of locking-related state provided by the server.
      Stateids may designate state related to open files, byte-range
      locks, delegations, or layouts.

   storage device:  the target to which clients may direct I/O requests
      when they hold an appropriate layout.  See Section 2.1 of
      [RFC8434] for further discussion of the difference between a data
      server and a storage device.

   storage protocol:  the protocol used by clients to do I/O operations
      to the storage device.  Each layout type specifies the set of
      storage protocols.

   systematic encoding:  An erasure coding scheme in which the first k
      of the k+m encoded shards are identical to the original k data
      blocks.  A healthy read (no failures) requires no decoding — the
      data shards are read directly.  Decoding is triggered only when
      data shards are missing.  Reed-Solomon Vandermonde and Mojette
      systematic are examples.

   tight coupling:  an arrangement in which the control protocol is one
      designed specifically for control communication.  It may be either
      a proprietary protocol adapted specifically to a particular
      metadata server or a protocol based on a Standards Track document.

   uid:  the user id, a numeric value that identifies which user owns a
      file.

   write hole:  A write hole is a data corruption scenario where either
      two clients are trying to write to the same chunk or one client is
      overwriting an existing chunk of data.

   wsize:  the data transfer buffer size used for WRITEs.

5.  Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
   BCP 14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

6.  Coupling of Storage Devices

   A server implementation may choose either a loosely coupled model or
   a tightly coupled model between the metadata server and the storage
   devices.  [RFC8434] describes the general problems facing pNFS
   implementations.  This document details how the new flexible file
   layout type addresses these issues.  To implement the tightly coupled
   model, a control protocol has to be defined.  As the flexible file
   layout imposes no special requirements on the client, the control
   protocol will need to provide:

   1.  management of both security and LAYOUTCOMMITs and

   2.  a global stateid model and management of these stateids.

   When implementing the loosely coupled model, the only control
   protocol will be a version of NFS, with no ability to provide a
   global stateid model or to prevent clients from using layouts
   inappropriately.  To enable client use in that environment, this
   document will specify how security, state, and locking are to be
   managed.

   The loosely and tightly coupled locking models defined in Section 2.3
   of [RFC8435] apply equally to this layout type, including the use of
   anonymous stateids with loosely coupled storage devices, the handling
   of lock and delegation stateids, and the mandatory byte-range lock
   requirements for the tightly coupled model.

6.1.  LAYOUTCOMMIT

   Regardless of the coupling model, the metadata server has the
   responsibility, upon receiving a LAYOUTCOMMIT (see Section 18.42 of
   [RFC8881]) to ensure that the semantics of pNFS are respected (see
   Section 3.1 of [RFC8434]).  These do include a requirement that data
   written to a data storage device be stable before the occurrence of
   the LAYOUTCOMMIT.

   It is the responsibility of the client to make sure the data file is
   stable before the metadata server begins to query the storage devices
   about the changes to the file.  If any WRITE to a storage device did
   not result with stable_how equal to FILE_SYNC, a LAYOUTCOMMIT to the
   metadata server MUST be preceded by a COMMIT to the storage devices
   written to.  Note that if the client has not done a COMMIT to the
   storage device, then the LAYOUTCOMMIT might not be synchronized to
   the last WRITE operation to the storage device.

6.2.  Fencing Clients from the Storage Device

   With loosely coupled storage devices, the metadata server uses
   synthetic uids (user ids) and gids (group ids) for the data file,
   where the uid owner of the data file is allowed read/write access and
   the gid owner is allowed read-only access.  As part of the layout
   (see ffv2ds_user and ffv2ds_group in Section 9.2), the client is
   provided with the user and group to be used in the Remote Procedure
   Call (RPC) [RFC5531] credentials needed to access the data file.
   Fencing off of clients is achieved by the metadata server changing
   the synthetic uid and/or gid owners of the data file on the storage
   device to implicitly revoke the outstanding RPC credentials.  A
   client presenting the wrong credential for the desired access will
   get an NFS4ERR_ACCESS error.

   With this loosely coupled model, the metadata server is not able to
   fence off a single client; it is forced to fence off all clients.
   However, as the other clients react to the fencing, returning their
   layouts and trying to get new ones, the metadata server can hand out
   a new uid and gid to allow access.

   It is RECOMMENDED to implement common access control methods at the
   storage device file system to allow only the metadata server root
   (super user) access to the storage device and to set the owner of all
   directories holding data files to the root user.  This approach
   provides a practical model to enforce access control and fence off
   cooperative clients, but it cannot protect against malicious clients;
   hence, it provides a level of security equivalent to AUTH_SYS.  It is
   RECOMMENDED that the communication between the metadata server and
   storage device be secure from eavesdroppers and man-in-the-middle
   protocol tampering.  The security measure could be physical security
   (e.g., the servers are co-located in a physically secure area),
   encrypted communications, or some other technique.

   With tightly coupled storage devices, the metadata server sets the
   user and group owners, mode bits, and Access Control List (ACL) of
   the data file to be the same as the metadata file.  And the client
   must authenticate with the storage device and go through the same
   authorization process it would go through via the metadata server.
   In the case of tight coupling, fencing is the responsibility of the
   control protocol and is not described in detail in this document.
   However, implementations of the tightly coupled locking model (see
   Section 6.3) will need a way to prevent access by certain clients to
   specific files by invalidating the corresponding stateids on the
   storage device.  In such a scenario, the client will be given an
   error of NFS4ERR_BAD_STATEID.

   The client need not know the model used between the metadata server
   and the storage device.  It need only react consistently to any
   errors in interacting with the storage device.  It SHOULD both return
   the layout and error to the metadata server and ask for a new layout.
   At that point, the metadata server can either hand out a new layout,
   hand out no layout (forcing the I/O through it), or deny the client
   further access to the file.

6.2.1.  Implementation Notes for Synthetic uids/gids

   The selection method for the synthetic uids and gids to be used for
   fencing in loosely coupled storage devices is strictly an
   implementation issue.  That is, an administrator might restrict a
   range of such ids available to the Lightweight Directory Access
   Protocol (LDAP) 'uid' field [RFC4519].  The administrator might also
   be able to choose an id that would never be used to grant access.
   Then, when the metadata server had a request to access a file, a
   SETATTR would be sent to the storage device to set the owner and
   group of the data file.  The user and group might be selected in a
   round-robin fashion from the range of available ids.

   Those ids would be sent back as ffv2ds_user and ffv2ds_group to the
   client, who would present them as the RPC credentials to the storage
   device.  When the client is done accessing the file and the metadata
   server knows that no other client is accessing the file, it can reset
   the owner and group to restrict access to the data file.

   When the metadata server wants to fence off a client, it changes the
   synthetic uid and/or gid to the restricted ids.  Note that using a
   restricted id ensures that there is a change of owner and at least
   one id available that never gets allowed access.

   Under an AUTH_SYS security model, synthetic uids and gids of 0 SHOULD
   be avoided.  These typically either grant super access to files on a
   storage device or are mapped to an anonymous id.  In the first case,
   even if the data file is fenced, the client might still be able to
   access the file.  In the second case, multiple ids might be mapped to
   the anonymous ids.

6.2.2.  Example of using Synthetic uids/gids

   The user loghyr creates a file "ompha.c" on the metadata server,
   which then creates a corresponding data file on the storage device.

   The metadata server entry may look like:

   -rw-r--r--    1 loghyr  staff    1697 Dec  4 11:31 ompha.c

                    Figure 1: Metadata's view of ompha.c

   On the storage device, the file may be assigned some unpredictable
   synthetic uid/gid to deny access:

   -rw-r-----    1 19452   28418    1697 Dec  4 11:31 data_ompha.c

                      Figure 2: Data's view of ompha.c

   When the file is opened on a client and accessed, the user will try
   to get a layout for the data file.  Since the layout knows nothing
   about the user (and does not care), it does not matter whether the
   user loghyr or garbo opens the file.  The client has to present an
   uid of 19452 to get write permission.  If it presents any other value
   for the uid, then it must give a gid of 28418 to get read access.

   Further, if the metadata server decides to fence the file, it SHOULD
   change the uid and/or gid such that these values neither match
   earlier values for that file nor match a predictable change based on
   an earlier fencing.

   -rw-r-----    1 19453   28419    1697 Dec  4 11:31 data_ompha.c

                  Figure 3: Fenced Data's view of ompha.c

   The set of synthetic gids on the storage device SHOULD be selected
   such that there is no mapping in any of the name services used by the
   storage device, i.e., each group SHOULD have no members.

   If the layout segment has an iomode of LAYOUTIOMODE4_READ, then the
   metadata server should return a synthetic uid that is not set on the
   storage device.  Only the synthetic gid would be valid.

   The client is thus solely responsible for enforcing file permissions
   in a loosely coupled model.  To allow loghyr write access, it will
   send an RPC to the storage device with a credential of 1066:1067.  To
   allow garbo read access, it will send an RPC to the storage device
   with a credential of 1067:1067.  The value of the uid does not matter
   as long as it is not the synthetic uid granted when getting the
   layout.

   While pushing the enforcement of permission checking onto the client
   may seem to weaken security, the client may already be responsible
   for enforcing permissions before modifications are sent to a server.
   With cached writes, the client is always responsible for tracking who
   is modifying a file and making sure to not coalesce requests from
   multiple users into one request.

6.3.  State and Locking Models

   An implementation can always be deployed as a loosely coupled model.
   There is, however, no way for a storage device to indicate over an
   NFS protocol that it can definitively participate in a tightly
   coupled model:

   *  Storage devices implementing the NFSv3 and NFSv4.0 protocols are
      always treated as loosely coupled.

   *  NFSv4.1+ storage devices that do not return the
      EXCHGID4_FLAG_USE_PNFS_DS flag set to EXCHANGE_ID are indicating
      that they are to be treated as loosely coupled.  From the locking
      viewpoint, they are treated in the same way as NFSv4.0 storage
      devices.

   *  NFSv4.1+ storage devices that do identify themselves with the
      EXCHGID4_FLAG_USE_PNFS_DS flag set to EXCHANGE_ID can potentially
      be tightly coupled.  They would use a back-end control protocol to
      implement the global stateid model as described in [RFC8881].

   A storage device would have to be either discovered or advertised
   over the control protocol to enable a tightly coupled model.

6.3.1.  Loosely Coupled Locking Model

   When locking-related operations are requested, they are primarily
   dealt with by the metadata server, which generates the appropriate
   stateids.  When an NFSv4 version is used as the data access protocol,
   the metadata server may make stateid-related requests of the storage
   devices.  However, it is not required to do so, and the resulting
   stateids are known only to the metadata server and the storage
   device.

   Given this basic structure, locking-related operations are handled as
   follows:

   *  OPENs are dealt with by the metadata server.  Stateids are
      selected by the metadata server and associated with the client ID
      describing the client's connection to the metadata server.  The
      metadata server may need to interact with the storage device to
      locate the file to be opened, but no locking-related functionality
      need be used on the storage device.

   *  OPEN_DOWNGRADE and CLOSE only require local execution on the
      metadata server.

   *  Advisory byte-range locks can be implemented locally on the
      metadata server.  As in the case of OPENs, the stateids associated
      with byte-range locks are assigned by the metadata server and only
      used on the metadata server.

   *  Delegations are assigned by the metadata server that initiates
      recalls when conflicting OPENs are processed.  No storage device
      involvement is required.

   *  TEST_STATEID and FREE_STATEID are processed locally on the
      metadata server, without storage device involvement.

   All I/O operations to the storage device are done using the anonymous
   stateid.  Thus, the storage device has no information about the
   openowner and lockowner responsible for issuing a particular I/O
   operation.  As a result:

   *  Mandatory byte-range locking cannot be supported because the
      storage device has no way of distinguishing I/O done on behalf of
      the lock owner from those done by others.

   *  Enforcement of share reservations is the responsibility of the
      client.  Even though I/O is done using the anonymous stateid, the
      client must ensure that it has a valid stateid associated with the
      openowner.

   In the event that a stateid is revoked, the metadata server is
   responsible for preventing client access, since it has no way of
   being sure that the client is aware that the stateid in question has
   been revoked.

   As the client never receives a stateid generated by a storage device,
   there is no client lease on the storage device and no prospect of
   lease expiration, even when access is via NFSv4 protocols.  Clients
   will have leases on the metadata server.  In dealing with lease
   expiration, the metadata server may need to use fencing to prevent
   revoked stateids from being relied upon by a client unaware of the
   fact that they have been revoked.

6.3.2.  Tightly Coupled Locking Model

   When locking-related operations are requested, they are primarily
   dealt with by the metadata server, which generates the appropriate
   stateids.  These stateids must be made known to the storage device
   using control protocol facilities.  For flex files v2 deployments in
   which the storage devices are NFSv4.2 servers, those facilities are
   provided by the TRUST_STATEID, REVOKE_STATEID, and
   BULK_REVOKE_STATEID operations defined in Section 6.4.

   Given this basic structure, locking-related operations are handled as
   follows:

   *  OPENs are dealt with primarily on the metadata server.  Stateids
      are selected by the metadata server and associated with the client
      ID describing the client's connection to the metadata server.  The
      metadata server needs to interact with the storage device to
      locate the file to be opened and to make the storage device aware
      of the association between the metadata-server-chosen stateid and
      the client and openowner that it represents.  OPEN_DOWNGRADE and
      CLOSE are executed initially on the metadata server, but the state
      change made must be propagated to the storage device.

   *  Advisory byte-range locks can be implemented locally on the
      metadata server.  As in the case of OPENs, the stateids associated
      with byte-range locks are assigned by the metadata server and are
      available for use on the metadata server.  Because I/O operations
      are allowed to present lock stateids, the metadata server needs
      the ability to make the storage device aware of the association
      between the metadata-server-chosen stateid and the corresponding
      open stateid it is associated with.

   *  Mandatory byte-range locks can be supported when both the metadata
      server and the storage devices have the appropriate support.  As
      in the case of advisory byte-range locks, these are assigned by
      the metadata server and are available for use on the metadata
      server.  To enable mandatory lock enforcement on the storage
      device, the metadata server needs the ability to make the storage
      device aware of the association between the metadata-server-chosen
      stateid and the client, openowner, and lock (i.e., lockowner,
      byte-range, and lock-type) that it represents.  Because I/O
      operations are allowed to present lock stateids, this information
      needs to be propagated to all storage devices to which I/O might
      be directed rather than only to storage device that contain the
      locked region.

   *  Delegations are assigned by the metadata server that initiates
      recalls when conflicting OPENs are processed.  Because I/O
      operations are allowed to present delegation stateids, the
      metadata server requires the ability:

      1.  to make the storage device aware of the association between
          the metadata-server-chosen stateid and the filehandle and
          delegation type it represents

      2.  to break such an association.

   *  TEST_STATEID is processed locally on the metadata server, without
      storage device involvement.

   *  FREE_STATEID is processed on the metadata server, but the metadata
      server requires the ability to propagate the request to the
      corresponding storage devices.

   Because the client will possess and use stateids valid on the storage
   device, there will be a client lease on the storage device, and the
   possibility of lease expiration does exist.  The best approach for
   the storage device is to retain these locks as a courtesy.  However,
   if it does not do so, control protocol facilities need to provide the
   means to synchronize lock state between the metadata server and
   storage device.

   Clients will also have leases on the metadata server that are subject
   to expiration.  In dealing with lease expiration, the metadata server
   would be expected to use control protocol facilities enabling it to
   invalidate revoked stateids on the storage device.  In the event the
   client is not responsive, the metadata server may need to use fencing
   to prevent revoked stateids from being acted upon by the storage
   device.

6.4.  Tight Coupling Control Protocol

   When an NFSv4.2 storage device participates in a tightly coupled
   deployment, the metadata server and the storage devices need a
   control protocol that:

   1.  registers the layout stateid with each storage device so the
       storage device can validate client I/O independently; and

   2.  revokes trust promptly when the metadata server withdraws the
       client's authorization -- for example, on CB_LAYOUTRECALL
       timeout, lease expiry, or layout return after error.

   This specification defines that control protocol as three new NFSv4.2
   operations: TRUST_STATEID (Section 26.12), REVOKE_STATEID
   (Section 26.13), and BULK_REVOKE_STATEID (Section 26.14).  These
   operations are sent by the metadata server to each storage device
   over a dedicated control session (see Section 6.4.2) and MUST NOT be
   sent by pNFS clients.

6.4.1.  Capability Discovery

   A storage device indicates support for tight coupling implicitly, by
   processing TRUST_STATEID rather than returning NFS4ERR_NOTSUPP.  The
   metadata server probes each storage device during control-session
   setup:

   SEQUENCE + PUTROOTFH + TRUST_STATEID(
       tsa_layout_stateid = ANONYMOUS_STATEID,
       tsa_iomode         = LAYOUTIOMODE4_READ,
       tsa_expire         = 0,
       tsa_principal      = "")

                  Figure 4: TRUST_STATEID capability probe

   The anonymous stateid is used deliberately: a correctly implemented
   storage device MUST reject it (see Section 26.12), so the probe
   cannot accidentally register garbage in the trust table.  The
   metadata server interprets the probe response as follows:

   *  NFS4ERR_NOTSUPP: tight coupling is not supported on this storage
      device.  The metadata server falls back to loose coupling
      (anonymous stateid plus fencing) and sets ffdv_tightly_coupled to
      false for this storage device.

   *  NFS4ERR_INVAL: tight coupling is supported.  The anonymous stateid
      was correctly rejected.  The metadata server records the
      capability and sets ffdv_tightly_coupled to true for this storage
      device.

   *  NFS4_OK: the storage device accepted an anonymous stateid into its
      trust table.  This is a storage device bug.  The metadata server
      SHOULD log the anomaly.  It MAY treat the capability as confirmed
      to avoid downgrading to loose coupling, but it MUST immediately
      issue REVOKE_STATEID to remove the bogus entry.

   The capability is recorded per storage device, not per file.  Partial
   support across a mirror set is permitted: each ff_device_versions4
   entry returned by GETDEVICEINFO carries its own ffdv_tightly_coupled
   flag, set independently.

6.4.2.  Control Session

   The metadata server establishes an NFSv4.2 session to each tight-
   coupling-capable storage device at startup.  On this session the
   metadata server acts as the storage device's client and presents
   EXCHGID4_FLAG_USE_NON_PNFS in its EXCHANGE_ID args.

   The storage device MUST verify that any incoming TRUST_STATEID,
   REVOKE_STATEID, or BULK_REVOKE_STATEID compound arrives on a session
   whose owning client presented EXCHGID4_FLAG_USE_PNFS_MDS in its
   EXCHANGE_ID args.  Requests that arrive on any other session MUST be
   rejected with NFS4ERR_PERM.  This is the sole access control on these
   operations; a pNFS client connecting to the storage device does not
   present EXCHGID4_FLAG_USE_PNFS_MDS and therefore cannot invoke them.

   The EXCHGID4_FLAG_USE_PNFS_MDS check replaces any path- or
   filehandle-level gating.  TRUST_STATEID operates on a filehandle that
   may be any file on the storage device, and the metadata server is the
   sole authority that can legitimately speak this protocol.

   Because the EXCHGID4_FLAG_USE_PNFS_MDS check relies on the owning
   client's self-declaration at EXCHANGE_ID time, the storage device
   cannot by itself distinguish a legitimate metadata server from any
   other host that sets the flag.  Deployments are therefore responsible
   for constraining who can establish a control session in the first
   place.  Two mechanisms are RECOMMENDED:

   1.  The control session SHOULD use RPCSEC_GSS with a machine
       principal that the storage device has been configured to accept
       as a metadata server.  The storage device validates the principal
       before accepting EXCHANGE_ID with EXCHGID4_FLAG_USE_PNFS_MDS.

   2.  Alternatively, the control session SHOULD run over a network path
       isolated from pNFS clients (for example, a dedicated management
       VLAN or mutual TLS ([RFC9289]) with an allowlisted client
       certificate), such that only configured metadata servers can
       reach the storage device on that path.

   Deploying neither mechanism reduces the authorization strength of
   TRUST_STATEID and the revocation operations to "any host that can
   reach the storage device can invoke them"; a strict deployment MUST
   apply at least one of the above.

6.4.3.  Flow at LAYOUTGET

   For each new or refreshed layout segment, the metadata server:

   1.  chooses the layout stateid (as it would without tight coupling);

   2.  identifies the tight-coupling-capable storage devices in the
       mirror set (those for which ffdv_tightly_coupled is true);

   3.  fans out TRUST_STATEID to each such storage device, specifying
       the layout stateid, the layout iomode, a tsa_expire derived from
       the metadata server's lease (see Section 6.4.6), and the client's
       authenticated identity in tsa_principal;

   4.  waits for all fan-outs to complete (or reach their per-storage-
       device timeout) before returning the layout.

   If every storage device in the mirror set rejects the TRUST_STATEID
   fan-out, the metadata server MUST NOT return the layout; instead it
   returns NFS4ERR_LAYOUTTRYLATER.  If some storage devices accept and
   others reject, the metadata server MAY return a layout covering only
   the accepting storage devices, subject to the mirror-set rules for
   minimum acceptable coverage.  A storage device that returns
   NFS4ERR_DELAY is retried until either success or the metadata
   server's LAYOUTGET-response budget is exhausted.  If a storage device
   returns NFS4ERR_NOTSUPP at this time (having accepted the probe
   earlier), the metadata server MUST clear ffdv_tightly_coupled for
   this storage device, fall back to loose coupling, and re-issue the
   layout accordingly.

6.4.4.  Principal Binding and the Kerberos Gap

   Flex files v1 has a known gap: a client authenticated to the metadata
   server with Kerberos has no way to present the same authenticated
   identity to the storage device, because v1 layouts carry only
   ffds_user / ffds_group (POSIX uid/gid for AUTH_SYS).  A strict
   Kerberos deployment on v1 must either allow AUTH_SYS from the
   metadata server's subnet or accept that the v1 data path is not
   Kerberos-protected.

   The tsa_principal field in TRUST_STATEID closes that gap.  When a
   client authenticates to the metadata server as a Kerberos principal
   (e.g., alice@REALM), the metadata server passes that principal name
   to each storage device in tsa_principal.  The storage device then
   enforces a two-part check on each CHUNK operation that presents the
   layout stateid:

   a.  the stateid is in the trust table and has not expired; and

   b.  the caller's authenticated identity (the RPCSEC_GSS display name
   on the CHUNK compound) matches tsa_principal.

   Both conditions MUST hold.  On principal mismatch the storage device
   MUST return NFS4ERR_ACCESS -- the semantics are "you do not have an
   authorized layout for this file", which matches the existing fencing
   error and avoids the confusion of NFS4ERR_WRONGSEC (which directs the
   client to re-authenticate with a different flavor) or
   NFS4ERR_BAD_STATEID (which directs the client to return the layout).

   The metadata server MUST populate tsa_principal with the RPCSEC_GSS
   display name of the authenticated client when the client
   authenticated to the metadata server via RPCSEC_GSS.  The metadata
   server MUST set tsa_principal to the empty string only for AUTH_SYS
   and TLS clients (for which there is no server- verified per-user
   identity).  Setting tsa_principal to the empty string for an
   RPCSEC_GSS client disables the principal check on the storage device
   and silently re-opens the flex files v1 Kerberos gap; it is a
   metadata server bug, not a protocol option.

   If tsa_principal is the empty string, no principal check applies.
   This is the expected setting for AUTH_SYS and TLS clients:

   *  AUTH_SYS clients have no server-verified identity.  The storage
      device's stateid check and the AUTH_SYS uid/gid on the data file
      together constitute the authorization.  In a tightly coupled
      deployment the data file's owner/group need not match the metadata
      file's, since ffv2ds_user and ffv2ds_group are ignored (see
      Section 9.8).

   *  TLS clients have transport-layer authentication via mutual TLS
      ([RFC9289]).  The TLS layer authenticates the client machine; the
      stateid check confirms the metadata server authorized that machine
      to access this file.  The machine-level authentication is handled
      beneath the RPC layer and is not reflected in tsa_principal.
      Opportunistic TLS (STARTTLS without certificate verification)
      provides encryption but not authentication, and therefore has the
      same authorization properties as plain AUTH_SYS.

6.4.5.  Client-Detected Trust Gap

   A window exists between a successful TRUST_STATEID fan-out and the
   client's first I/O to the storage device.  A transient failure may
   cause the storage device to forget or reject the entry before the
   client's first CHUNK_WRITE arrives.  The client cannot distinguish
   this case from legitimate revocation; both surface as
   NFS4ERR_BAD_STATEID on the storage device.

   The recovery path:

   1.  The client sends LAYOUTERROR(layout_stateid, device_id,
       NFS4ERR_BAD_STATEID) to the metadata server.

   2.  The metadata server retries TRUST_STATEID against the reporting
       storage device.  If the retry succeeds, the metadata server
       returns NFS4_OK for LAYOUTERROR.  The client retries the original
       I/O.

   3.  If the retry fails -- the storage device is unreachable or
       returns a hard error -- the metadata server issues
       CB_LAYOUTRECALL for that device and the client returns the layout
       segment covering that storage device.  The client is expected to
       re-request via LAYOUTGET.

   This is the same LAYOUTERROR path used for NFS4ERR_ACCESS or
   NFS4ERR_PERM in the fencing model (see Section 6.2), with the
   metadata server's action being "retry TRUST_STATEID" instead of
   "rotate uid/gid".

6.4.6.  Lease and Renewal

   tsa_expire in a TRUST_STATEID request is a wall-clock expiry instant
   expressed as an nfstime4.  The metadata server MUST set tsa_expire to
   the current wall-clock time plus the metadata server's client lease
   period.

   The metadata server MUST re-issue TRUST_STATEID for an entry before
   tsa_expire while the corresponding layout is outstanding.  The
   RECOMMENDED trigger is: when an entry is within half the lease period
   of its tsa_expire, re-issue TRUST_STATEID with a refreshed
   tsa_expire.  Renewing on every SEQUENCE that keeps the layout stateid
   alive is correct but produces metadata-server-to-storage-device
   traffic proportional to the client's SEQUENCE rate, which is
   undesirable in steady state.

   If an entry expires on the storage device before the metadata server
   renews it -- for example, because the metadata server is partitioned
   from the storage device for longer than the lease period -- the
   storage device MUST return NFS4ERR_BAD_STATEID to the client on the
   next CHUNK operation.  The client returns the layout to the metadata
   server and re-requests.  This is the same recovery path as the trust
   gap described above.

6.4.7.  Storage Device Crash Recovery

   The trust table is volatile.  The storage device MUST NOT persist
   trust entries across restarts; a storage device restart therefore
   empties the trust table.

   The client detects a storage device restart via NFS4ERR_BADSESSION or
   NFS4ERR_STALE_CLIENTID on its data server session.  The client
   returns the affected layout segment to the metadata server via
   LAYOUTRETURN and re-requests via LAYOUTGET.  The metadata server then
   fans out fresh TRUST_STATEID operations to the recovered storage
   device.

   Planned storage device restarts (software upgrade, etc.)  SHOULD
   drain in-flight CHUNK operations before shutting down.

6.4.8.  Metadata Server Crash Recovery

   When the metadata server restarts, its control sessions to the
   storage devices are lost.  Trust entries remain on the storage
   devices until tsa_expire, but the metadata server is no longer
   renewing them; the entries are effectively orphaned until the
   metadata server completes grace.

   When the metadata server reconnects to a storage device with a new
   boot epoch -- that is, the EXCHANGE_ID returns a new server owner on
   the storage device's view of the metadata server -- the storage
   device SHOULD mark all trust entries established under the prior
   metadata-server epoch as pending-revalidation.  While an entry is
   pending-revalidation:

   *  I/O that presents the entry's stateid MUST receive NFS4ERR_DELAY,
      not NFS4ERR_BAD_STATEID.  NFS4ERR_DELAY tells the client to retry
      with the same stateid -- the metadata server is recovering and may
      yet revalidate the entry.  NFS4ERR_BAD_STATEID would instead cause
      the client to return the layout immediately, producing a
      thundering herd against the metadata server during grace.

   *  An entry remains pending-revalidation until the metadata server
      either re-issues TRUST_STATEID for it (which transitions it back
      to trusted) or until the entry's tsa_expire elapses (which removes
      it).

   The metadata server's recovery sequence is:

   1.  Reconnect to each storage device and establish a fresh control
       session.

   2.  Optionally issue BULK_REVOKE_STATEID with an all-zeros clientid
       to each storage device.  This clears the prior trust table
       eagerly; skipping this step is correct, because orphan entries
       expire via tsa_expire.

   3.  Enter grace and accept RECLAIM operations from clients.  For each
       reclaimed layout, fan out TRUST_STATEID to the relevant storage
       devices.

   4.  Exit grace.  Clients that did not reclaim in time have their
       state revoked; the metadata server issues REVOKE_STATEID or
       BULK_REVOKE_STATEID on their behalf.

   Metadata servers SHOULD persist the set of outstanding TRUST_STATEID
   entries (clientid, layout stateid, storage device address,
   tsa_expire) to stable storage.  With this persistence the metadata
   server can re-issue TRUST_STATEID for all known entries immediately
   upon reconnecting to each storage device, before clients begin
   reclaiming.  This shrinks the window during which the storage device
   returns NFS4ERR_DELAY for client I/O.  Persistence is a latency
   optimization, not a correctness requirement: the re-layout path
   handles recovery in all cases.

6.4.9.  Backward Compatibility

   *  NFSv3 storage devices are unchanged.  They are always treated as
      loosely coupled; TRUST_STATEID does not exist on NFSv3 servers.

   *  NFSv4.2 storage devices for which the TRUST_STATEID probe returns
      NFS4ERR_NOTSUPP are treated as loosely coupled; fencing is the
      only revocation mechanism, the same as for NFSv3.

   *  NFSv4.2 storage devices for which the probe returns NFS4ERR_INVAL
      support tight coupling; the metadata server uses TRUST_STATEID at
      LAYOUTGET and REVOKE_STATEID or BULK_REVOKE_STATEID for revocation
      instead of fencing.

   A single deployment MAY contain a mix of tight-coupled and loose-
   coupled storage devices; each is negotiated independently via the
   probe.

7.  XDR Description of the Flexible File Layout Type

   This document contains the External Data Representation (XDR)
   [RFC4506] description of the flexible file layout type.  The XDR
   description is embedded in this document in a way that makes it
   simple for the reader to extract into a ready-to-compile form.  The
   reader can feed this document into the shell script in Figure 5 to
   produce the machine-readable XDR description of the flexible file
   layout type.

   #!/bin/sh
   grep '^ *///' $* | sed 's?^ */// ??' | sed 's?^ *///$??'

                            Figure 5: extract.sh

   That is, if the above script is stored in a file called "extract.sh"
   and this document is in a file called "spec.txt", then the reader can
   run the script as in Figure 6.

   sh extract.sh < spec.txt > flex_files2_prot.x

                    Figure 6: Example use of extract.sh

   The effect of the script is to remove leading blank space from each
   line, plus a sentinel sequence of "///".

   XDR descriptions with the sentinel sequence are embedded throughout
   the document.

   Note that the XDR code contained in this document depends on types
   from the NFSv4.1 nfs4_prot.x file [RFC5662].  This includes both nfs
   types that end with a 4, such as offset4, length4, etc., as well as
   more generic types such as uint32_t and uint64_t.

   While the XDR can be appended to that from [RFC7863], the various
   code snippets belong in their respective areas of that XDR.

8.  Device Addressing and Discovery

   Data operations to a storage device require the client to know the
   network address of the storage device.  The NFSv4.1+ GETDEVICEINFO
   operation (Section 18.40 of [RFC8881]) is used by the client to
   retrieve that information.

8.1.  ff_device_addr4

   The ff_device_addr4 data structure (see Figure 8) is returned by the
   server as the layout-type-specific opaque field da_addr_body in the
   device_addr4 structure by a successful GETDEVICEINFO operation.

      struct ff_device_versions4 {
              uint32_t        ffdv_version;
              uint32_t        ffdv_minorversion;
              uint32_t        ffdv_rsize;
              uint32_t        ffdv_wsize;
              bool            ffdv_tightly_coupled;
      };

                       Figure 7: ff_device_versions4

      struct ff_device_addr4 {
              multipath_list4     ffda_netaddrs;
              ff_device_versions4 ffda_versions<>;
      };

                         Figure 8: ff_device_addr4

   The ffda_netaddrs field is used to locate the storage device.  It
   MUST be set by the server to a list holding one or more of the device
   network addresses.

   The ffda_versions array allows the metadata server to present choices
   as to NFS version, minor version, and coupling strength to the
   client.  The ffdv_version and ffdv_minorversion represent the NFS
   protocol to be used to access the storage device.  This layout
   specification defines the semantics for ffdv_versions 3 and 4.  If
   ffdv_version equals 3, then the server MUST set ffdv_minorversion to
   0 and ffdv_tightly_coupled to false.  The client MUST then access the
   storage device using the NFSv3 protocol [RFC1813].  If ffdv_version
   equals 4, then the server MUST set ffdv_minorversion to one of the
   NFSv4 minor version numbers, and the client MUST access the storage
   device using NFSv4 with the specified minor version.

   Note that while the client might determine that it cannot use any of
   the configured combinations of ffdv_version, ffdv_minorversion, and
   ffdv_tightly_coupled, when it gets the device list from the metadata
   server, there is no way to indicate to the metadata server as to
   which device it is version incompatible.  However, if the client
   waits until it retrieves the layout from the metadata server, it can
   at that time clearly identify the storage device in question (see
   Section 9.14).

   The ffdv_rsize and ffdv_wsize are used to communicate the maximum
   rsize and wsize supported by the storage device.  As the storage
   device can have a different rsize or wsize than the metadata server,
   the ffdv_rsize and ffdv_wsize allow the metadata server to
   communicate that information on behalf of the storage device.

   ffdv_tightly_coupled informs the client as to whether the metadata
   server is tightly coupled with this storage device.  Note that even
   if the data protocol is at least NFSv4.1, it may still be the case
   that there is loose coupling in effect.  For an NFSv4.2 storage
   device, the metadata server sets ffdv_tightly_coupled to true only
   after confirming the storage device implements the TRUST_STATEID
   control protocol via the capability probe described in Section 6.4.1.
   An NFSv4.2 storage device that does not implement TRUST_STATEID
   (returning NFS4ERR_NOTSUPP to the probe) MUST be advertised with
   ffdv_tightly_coupled set to false.

   If ffdv_tightly_coupled is not set, then the client MUST commit
   writes to the storage devices for the file before sending a
   LAYOUTCOMMIT to the metadata server.  That is, the writes MUST be
   committed by the client to stable storage via issuing WRITEs with
   stable_how == FILE_SYNC or by issuing a COMMIT after WRITEs with
   stable_how != FILE_SYNC (see Section 3.3.7 of [RFC1813]).

8.2.  Storage Device Multipathing

   The flexible file layout type supports multipathing to multiple
   storage device addresses.  Storage-device-level multipathing is used
   for bandwidth scaling via trunking and for higher availability of use
   in the event of a storage device failure.  Multipathing allows the
   client to switch to another storage device address that may be that
   of another storage device that is exporting the same data stripe
   unit, without having to contact the metadata server for a new layout.

   To support storage device multipathing, ffda_netaddrs contains an
   array of one or more storage device network addresses.  This array
   (data type multipath_list4) represents a list of storage devices
   (each identified by a network address), with the possibility that
   some storage device will appear in the list multiple times.

   The client is free to use any of the network addresses as a
   destination to send storage device requests.  If some network
   addresses are less desirable paths to the data than others, then the
   metadata server SHOULD NOT include those network addresses in
   ffda_netaddrs.  If less desirable network addresses exist to provide
   failover, the RECOMMENDED method to offer the addresses is to provide
   them in a replacement device-ID-to-device-address mapping or a
   replacement device ID.  When a client finds no response from the
   storage device using all addresses available in ffda_netaddrs, it
   SHOULD send a GETDEVICEINFO to attempt to replace the existing
   device-ID-to-device-address mappings.  If the metadata server detects
   that all network paths represented by ffda_netaddrs are unavailable,
   the metadata server SHOULD send a CB_NOTIFY_DEVICEID (if the client
   has indicated it wants device ID notifications for changed device
   IDs) to change the device-ID-to-device-address mappings to the
   available addresses.  If the device ID itself will be replaced, the
   metadata server SHOULD recall all layouts with the device ID and thus
   force the client to get new layouts and device ID mappings via
   LAYOUTGET and GETDEVICEINFO.

   Generally, if two network addresses appear in ffda_netaddrs, they
   will designate the same storage device.  When the storage device is
   accessed over NFSv4.1 or a higher minor version, the two storage
   device addresses will support the implementation of client ID or
   session trunking (the latter is RECOMMENDED) as defined in [RFC8881].
   The two storage device addresses will share the same server owner or
   major ID of the server owner.  It is not always necessary for the two
   storage device addresses to designate the same storage device with
   trunking being used.  For example, the data could be read-only, and
   the data consist of exact replicas.

9.  Flexible File Version 2 Layout Type

   The original layouttype4 introduced in [RFC5662] is extended as shown
   in Figure 9.

          enum layouttype4 {
              LAYOUT4_NFSV4_1_FILES   = 1,
              LAYOUT4_OSD2_OBJECTS    = 2,
              LAYOUT4_BLOCK_VOLUME    = 3,
              LAYOUT4_FLEX_FILES      = 4,
              LAYOUT4_FLEX_FILES_V2   = 5
          };

          struct layout_content4 {
              layouttype4             loc_type;
              opaque                  loc_body<>;
          };

          struct layout4 {
              offset4                 lo_offset;
              length4                 lo_length;
              layoutiomode4           lo_iomode;
              layout_content4         lo_content;
          };

                     Figure 9: The original layout type

   This document defines structures associated with the layouttype4
   value LAYOUT4_FLEX_FILES_V2.  [RFC8881] specifies the loc_body
   structure as an XDR type "opaque".  The opaque layout is
   uninterpreted by the generic pNFS client layers but is interpreted by
   the flexible file layout type implementation.  This section defines
   the structure of this otherwise opaque value, ffv2_layout4.

9.1.  ffv2_coding_type4

      /// enum ffv2_coding_type4 {
      ///     FFV2_CODING_MIRRORED                  = 1,
      ///     FFV2_ENCODING_MOJETTE_SYSTEMATIC      = 2,
      ///     FFV2_ENCODING_MOJETTE_NON_SYSTEMATIC  = 3,
      ///     FFV2_ENCODING_RS_VANDERMONDE          = 4
      /// };

                         Figure 10: The coding type

   The ffv2_coding_type4 (see Figure 10) encompasses a new IANA registry
   for 'Flexible Files Version 2 Erasure Coding Type Registry'.  I.e.,
   instead of defining a new Layout Type for each Erasure Coding, we
   define a new Erasure Coding Type.  Except for FFV2_CODING_MIRRORED,
   each of the types is expected to employ the new operations in this
   document.

   FFV2_CODING_MIRRORED offers replication of data and not integrity of
   data.  As such, it does not need operations like CHUNK_WRITE (see
   Section 26.10.

9.1.1.  Encoding Type Interoperability

   The data servers do not interpret erasure-coded data — they store and
   return opaque chunks.  The NFS wire protocol likewise does not depend
   on the encoding mathematics.  However, a client that writes data
   using one encoding type MUST be able to read it back, and a different
   client implementation MUST be able to read data written by the first
   client if both claim to support the same encoding type.

   This interoperability requirement means that each registered encoding
   type MUST fully specify the encoding and decoding mathematics such
   that two independent implementations produce byte-identical encoded
   output for the same input.  The specification of a new encoding type
   MUST include one of the following:

   1.  A complete mathematical specification of the encoding and
       decoding algorithms, including all parameters (e.g., field
       polynomial, matrix construction, element size) sufficient for an
       independent implementation to produce interoperable results.

   2.  A reference to a published patent or pending patent application
       that contains the algorithm specification.  Implementors can then
       evaluate the licensing terms and decide whether to support the
       encoding type.

   3.  A declaration that the encoding type is a proprietary
       implementation.  In this case, the encoding type name SHOULD
       include an organizational prefix (e.g.,
       FFV2_ENCODING_ACME_FOOBAR) to signal that interoperability is
       limited to implementations licensed by that organization.

   Option 1 is RECOMMENDED for encoding types intended for broad
   interoperability.  Options 2 and 3 allow vendors to register encoding
   types for use within their own ecosystems while preserving the
   encoding type namespace.

   The rationale for this requirement is that erasure coding moves
   computation from the server to the client.  If the client cannot
   determine how data was encoded, it cannot decode it.  Unlike layout
   types (where the server controls the storage format), encoding types
   require client-side agreement on the mathematics.

9.2.  ffv2_layout4

9.2.1.  ffv2_flags4

      /// const FFV2_FLAGS_NO_LAYOUTCOMMIT   = FF_FLAGS_NO_LAYOUTCOMMIT;
      /// const FFV2_FLAGS_NO_IO_THRU_MDS    = FF_FLAGS_NO_IO_THRU_MDS;
      /// const FFV2_FLAGS_NO_READ_IO        = FF_FLAGS_NO_READ_IO;
      /// const FFV2_FLAGS_WRITE_ONE_MIRROR  = FF_FLAGS_WRITE_ONE_MIRROR;
      /// const FFV2_FLAGS_ONLY_ONE_WRITER   = 0x00000010;
      ///
      /// typedef uint32_t            ffv2_flags4;

                         Figure 11: The ffv2_flags4

   The ffv2_flags4 in Figure 11 is a bitmap that allows the metadata
   server to inform the client of particular conditions that may result
   from more or less tight coupling of the storage devices.

   FFV2_FLAGS_NO_LAYOUTCOMMIT:  can be set to indicate that the client
      is not required to send LAYOUTCOMMIT to the metadata server.

   FFV2_FLAGS_NO_IO_THRU_MDS:  can be set to indicate that the client
      should not send I/O operations to the metadata server.  That is,
      even if the client could determine that there was a network
      disconnect to a storage device, the client should not try to proxy
      the I/O through the metadata server.

   FFV2_FLAGS_NO_READ_IO:  can be set to indicate that the client should
      not send READ requests with the layouts of iomode
      LAYOUTIOMODE4_RW.  Instead, it should request a layout of iomode
      LAYOUTIOMODE4_READ from the metadata server.

   FFV2_FLAGS_WRITE_ONE_MIRROR:  can be set to indicate that the client
      only needs to update one of the mirrors (see Section 12.1).

   FFV2_FLAGS_ONLY_ONE_WRITER:  can be set to indicate that the client
      only needs to use a CHUNK_WRITE to update the chunks in the data
      file.  I.e., keep the ability to rollback in case of a write hole
      caused by overwriting.  If this flag is not set, then the client
      MUST write chunks with CHUNK_WRITE with the cwa_guard set in order
      to prevent collision across the data servers.

9.3.  ffv2_file_info4

      /// struct ffv2_file_info4 {
      ///     stateid4                fffi_stateid;
      ///     nfs_fh4                 fffi_fh_vers;
      /// };

                       Figure 12: The ffv2_file_info4

   The ffv2_file_info4 is a new structure to help with the stateid issue
   discussed in Section 5.1 of [RFC8435].  I.e., in version 1 of the
   Flexible File Layout Type, there was the singleton ffv2ds_stateid
   combined with the ffv2ds_fh_vers array.  I.e., each NFSv4 version has
   its own stateid.  In Figure 12, each NFSv4 filehandle has a one-to-
   one correspondence to a stateid.

9.4.  ffv2_ds_flags4

      /// const FFV2_DS_FLAGS_ACTIVE        = 0x00000001;
      /// const FFV2_DS_FLAGS_SPARE         = 0x00000002;
      /// const FFV2_DS_FLAGS_PARITY        = 0x00000004;
      /// const FFV2_DS_FLAGS_REPAIR        = 0x00000008;
      /// typedef uint32_t            ffv2_ds_flags4;

                       Figure 13: The ffv2_ds_flags4

   The ffv2_ds_flags4 (in Figure 13) flags details the state of the data
   servers.  With Erasure Coding algorithms, there are both Systematic
   and Non-Systematic approaches.  In the Systematic, the bits for
   integrity are placed amongst the resulting transformed chunk.  Such
   an implementation would typically see FFV2_DS_FLAGS_ACTIVE and
   FFV2_DS_FLAGS_SPARE data servers.  The FFV2_DS_FLAGS_SPARE ones allow
   the client to repair a payload without engaging the metadata server.
   I.e., if one of the FFV2_DS_FLAGS_ACTIVE did not respond to a
   WRITE_BLOCK, the client could fail the chunk to the
   FFV2_DS_FLAGS_SPARE data server.

   With the Non-Systematic approach, the data and integrity live on
   different data servers.  Such an implementation would typically see
   FFV2_DS_FLAGS_ACTIVE and FFV2_DS_FLAGS_PARITY data servers.  If the
   implementation wanted to allow for local repair, it would also use
   FFV2_DS_FLAGS_SPARE.

   The FFV2_DS_FLAGS_REPAIR flag can be used by the metadata server to
   inform the client that the indicated data server is a replacement
   data server as far as existing data is concerned.
   // Fill in
   //
   // -- Tom

   See [Plank97] for further reference to storage layouts for coding.

9.5.  ffv2_data_server4

      /// struct ffv2_data_server4 {
      ///     deviceid4               ffv2ds_deviceid;
      ///     uint32_t                ffv2ds_efficiency;
      ///     ffv2_file_info4         ffv2ds_file_info<>;
      ///     fattr4_owner            ffv2ds_user;
      ///     fattr4_owner_group      ffv2ds_group;
      ///     ffv2_ds_flags4          ffv2ds_flags;
      /// };

                      Figure 14: The ffv2_data_server4

   The ffv2_data_server4 (in Figure 14) describes a data file and how to
   access it via the different NFS protocols.

9.6.  ffv2_coding_type_data4

      /// union ffv2_coding_type_data4 switch
      ///         (ffv2_coding_type4 fctd_coding) {
      ///     case FFV2_CODING_MIRRORED:
      ///         ffv2_data_protection4   fctd_protection;
      ///     default:
      ///         ffv2_data_protection4   fctd_protection;
      /// };

                   Figure 15: The ffv2_coding_type_data4

   The ffv2_coding_type_data4 (in Figure 15) describes the data
   protection geometry for the layout.  All coding types carry an
   ffv2_data_protection4 (Figure 21) specifying the number of data and
   parity shards.  The coding type enum determines how the shards are
   encoded; the protection structure determines how many shards there
   are.

   Although the FFV2_CODING_MIRRORED case and the default case currently
   carry the same type, the union form is intentional.  Future revisions
   of this specification may assign distinct arm types to specific
   coding types; using a union now avoids an incompatible change to the
   XDR at that time.

   For FFV2_CODING_MIRRORED, fdp_data is 1 and fdp_parity is the number
   of additional copies (e.g., fdp_parity=2 for 3-way mirroring).
   Erasure coding types registered in companion documents (e.g., Reed-
   Solomon Vandermonde, Mojette systematic) use fdp_data >= 2 and
   fdp_parity >= 1.

      /// enum ffv2_striping {
      ///     FFV2_STRIPING_NONE = 0,
      ///     FFV2_STRIPING_SPARSE = 1,
      ///     FFV2_STRIPING_DENSE = 2
      /// };
      ///
      /// struct ffv2_stripes4 {
      ///         ffv2_data_server4       ffs_data_servers<>;
      /// };

                         Figure 16: The stripes v2

   Each stripe contains a set of data servers in ffs_data_servers.  If
   the stripe is part of a ffv2_coding_type_data4 of
   FFV2_CODING_MIRRORED, then the length of ffs_data_servers MUST be 1.

9.7.  ffv2_key4

      /// typedef uint64_t ffv2_key4;

                          Figure 17: The ffv2_key4

   The ffv2_key4 is an opaque 64-bit identifier used to associate a
   mirror instance with its backing storage key.  The value is assigned
   by the metadata server and is opaque to the client.

9.8.  ffv2_mirror4

      /// struct ffv2_mirror4 {
      ///         ffv2_coding_type_data4  ffm_coding_type_data;
      ///         ffv2_key4               ffm_key;
      ///         ffv2_striping           ffm_striping;
      ///         uint32_t                ffm_striping_unit_size; // The minimum stripe unit size is 64 bytes.
      ///         uint32_t                ffm_client_id;
      ///         ffv2_stripes4           ffm_stripes<>; // Length of this array is the stripe count
      /// };

                        Figure 18: The ffv2_mirror4

   The ffv2_mirror4 (in Figure 18) describes the Flexible File Layout
   Version 2 specific fields.

   The ffm_client_id is a 32-bit value, assigned by the metadata server
   at layout-grant time, that the client MUST use as the cg_client_id
   field of chunk_guard4 (see Section 25.1) in every CHUNK_WRITE it
   issues against the mirror's data servers.  Its purpose is to satisfy
   the 32-bit-per-field budget of chunk_guard4 while preserving the
   guarantee that concurrent writers on the same file are
   distinguishable:

   *  The NFSv4 clientid4 ([RFC8881]) is a 64-bit structured value whose
      low 32 bits (a slot index) are not guaranteed unique across
      clients that hold layouts on the same file.  Folding clientid4 to
      32 bits locally at each client could therefore collide with
      another client's folded value and violate the uniqueness contract
      on chunk_guard4.

   *  Only the metadata server has the information needed to avoid such
      collisions: it sees every layout it grants on a file and can
      assign a dense 32-bit ffm_client_id that is guaranteed distinct
      from the ffm_client_ids assigned to other clients holding
      concurrent write layouts on the same file.  The metadata server
      MUST assign ffm_client_id subject to this uniqueness rule.

   *  Because cg_client_id participates in the deterministic tiebreaker
      for racing writers (see Section 25.1), having the metadata server
      assign it also lets the metadata server influence which client
      wins contention by choosing the numeric ordering of the values it
      hands out.  Specific ordering policies are implementation-defined
      and out of scope for this document, but the protocol mechanism is
      present.

   An ffm_client_id is scoped to the file and layout for which it was
   granted.  A client that holds layouts on two different files may
   receive two different ffm_client_ids from the same metadata server,
   and a client that relinquishes and later re-acquires a layout on a
   given file MAY be assigned a different ffm_client_id. ffm_client_id
   does NOT survive a metadata server restart: the metadata server
   reassigns values as clients reclaim layouts during the grace period.

   The ffm_coding_type_data is which encoding type is used by the
   mirror.

   The ffm_striping is which striping method is used by the mirror.

   The ffm_striping_unit_size is the stripe unit size used by the
   mirror.  If the value of ffm_striping is FFV2_STRIPING_NONE, then the
   value of ffm_striping_unit_size MUST be 1.

   The ffm_stripes is the array of stripes for the mirror.  If there is
   no striping or the ffm_coding_type_data is FFV2_CODING_MIRRORED, then
   the length of ffm_stripes MUST be 1.

9.9.  ffv2_layout4

      /// struct ffv2_layout4 {
      ///     ffv2_mirror4            ffl_mirrors<>;
      ///     ffv2_flags4             ffl_flags;
      ///     uint32_t                ffl_stats_collect_hint;
      /// };

                        Figure 19: The ffv2_layout4

   The ffv2_layout4 (in Figure 19) describes the Flexible File Layout
   Version 2.

   The ffl_mirrors field is the array of mirrored storage devices that
   provide the storage for the current stripe; see Figure 20.

   The ffl_stats_collect_hint field provides a hint to the client on how
   often the server wants it to report LAYOUTSTATS for a file.  The time
   is in seconds.

                   +-----------+
                   |           |
                   |           |
                   |   File    |
                   |           |
                   |           |
                   +-----+-----+
                         |
        +-------------+-----+----------------+
        |                   |                |
   +----+-----+       +-----+----+       +---+----------+
   | Mirror 1 |       | Mirror 2 |       | Mirror 3     |
   | MIRRORED |       | MIRRORED |       | REED_SOLOMON |
   +----+-----+       +-----+----+       +---+----------+
        |                   |                |
        |                   |                |
   +-----------+      +-----------+      +-----------+
   |+-----------+     | Stripe 1  |      |+-----------+
   +| Stripe N  |     +-----------+      +| Stripe N  |
    +-----------+           |             +-----------+
        |                   |                |
        |                   |                |
   +-----------+      +-----------+      +-----------+
   | Storage   |      | Storage   |      |+-----------+
   | Device    |      | Device    |      ||+-----------+
   +-----------+      +-----------+      +||  Storage  |
                                          +|  Devices  |
                                           +-----------+

              Figure 20: The Relationship between MDS and DSes

   As shown in Figure 20 if the ffm_coding_type_data is
   FFV2_CODING_MIRRORED, then each of the stripes MUST only have 1
   storage device.  I.e., the length of ffs_data_servers MUST be 1.  The
   other encoding types can have any number of storage devices.

   The abstraction here is that for FFV2_CODING_MIRRORED, each stripe
   describes exactly one data server.  And for all other encoding types,
   each of the stripes describes a set of data servers to which the
   chunks are distributed.  Further, the payload length can be different
   per stripe.

9.10.  ffv2_data_protection4

      /// struct ffv2_data_protection4 {
      ///     uint32_t fdp_data;    /* data shards (k) */
      ///     uint32_t fdp_parity;  /* parity/redundancy shards (m) */
      /// };

                    Figure 21: The ffv2_data_protection4

   The ffv2_data_protection4 (in Figure 21) describes the data
   protection geometry as a pair of counts: the number of data shards
   (fdp_data, also known as k) and the number of parity or redundancy
   shards (fdp_parity, also known as m).  This structure is used in both
   layout hints and layout responses, and applies uniformly to all
   coding types:

    +=================+==========+============+=======+===============+
    | Protection Mode | fdp_data | fdp_parity | Total | Description   |
    |                 |          |            | DSes  |               |
    +=================+==========+============+=======+===============+
    | Mirroring       | 1        | 2          | 3     | 3 copies, no  |
    | (3-way)         |          |            |       | encoding      |
    +-----------------+----------+------------+-------+---------------+
    | Striping        | 6        | 0          | 6     | Parallel I/O, |
    | (6-way)         |          |            |       | no redundancy |
    +-----------------+----------+------------+-------+---------------+
    | RS Vandermonde  | 4        | 2          | 6     | Tolerates 2   |
    | 4+2             |          |            |       | DS failures   |
    +-----------------+----------+------------+-------+---------------+
    | Mojette-sys 8+2 | 8        | 2          | 10    | Tolerates 2   |
    |                 |          |            |       | DS failures   |
    +-----------------+----------+------------+-------+---------------+

              Table 1: Example data protection configurations

   By expressing all protection modes as (fdp_data, fdp_parity) pairs, a
   single structure serves mirroring, striping, and all erasure coding
   types.  The coding type (Figure 10) determines HOW the shards are
   encoded; the protection structure determines HOW MANY shards there
   are.

   The total number of data servers required is fdp_data + fdp_parity.
   The storage overhead is fdp_parity / fdp_data (e.g., 50% for 4+2, 25%
   for 8+2).

9.11.  ffv2_layouthint4

      /// struct ffv2_layouthint4 {
      ///     ffv2_coding_type4       fflh_supported_types<>;
      ///     ffv2_data_protection4   fflh_preferred_protection;
      /// };

                      Figure 22: The ffv2_layouthint4

   The ffv2_layouthint4 (in Figure 22) describes the layout_hint (see
   Section 5.12.4 of [RFC8881]) that the client can provide to the
   metadata server.

   The client provides two hints:

   fflh_supported_types  An ordered list of coding types the client
      supports, with the most preferred type first.  The server SHOULD
      select a type from this list but MAY choose any type it supports.
      If the server does not support any of the listed types, it returns
      NFS4ERR_CODING_NOT_SUPPORTED, and the client can retry with a
      different list to discover the overlapping set.

   fflh_preferred_protection  The client's preferred data protection
      geometry as a (fdp_data, fdp_parity) pair.  The server SHOULD
      honor this hint but MAY override it based on server-side policy.
      A server that manages data protection via administrative policy
      (e.g., per-directory or per-export objectives) will typically
      ignore this hint and return the geometry dictated by policy.

   For example, a client that prefers Mojette systematic with 8+2
   protection would send:

   fflh_supported_types = { FFV2_CODING_MIRRORED,
                            FFV2_ENCODING_MOJETTE_SYSTEMATIC,
                            FFV2_ENCODING_RS_VANDERMONDE }
   fflh_preferred_protection = { fdp_data = 8, fdp_parity = 2 }

   A server with a policy of RS 4+2 for this directory would ignore both
   hints and return a layout with FFV2_ENCODING_RS_VANDERMONDE and
   (fdp_data=4, fdp_parity=2).  A server without erasure coding might
   return FFV2_CODING_MIRRORED with (fdp_data=1, fdp_parity=2) for 3-way
   mirroring.

   Note: In Figure 19 ffv2_coding_type_data4 is an enumerated union with
   the payload of each arm being defined by the protection type.
   ffm_client_id tells the client which id to use when interacting with
   the data servers.

   The ffv2_layout4 structure (see Figure 19) specifies a layout in that
   portion of the data file described in the current layout segment.  It
   is either a single instance or a set of mirrored copies of that
   portion of the data file.  When mirroring is in effect, it protects
   against loss of data in layout segments.

   While not explicitly shown in Figure 19, each layout4 element
   returned in the logr_layout array of LAYOUTGET4res (see
   Section 18.43.2 of [RFC8881]) describes a layout segment.  Hence,
   each ffv2_layout4 also describes a layout segment.  It is possible
   that the file is concatenated from more than one layout segment.
   Each layout segment MAY represent different striping parameters.

   The ffm_striping_unit_size field (inside each ffv2_mirror4) is the
   stripe unit size in use for that mirror.  The number of stripes is
   given by the number of elements in ffs_data_servers within each
   ffv2_stripes4.  If the number of stripes is one, then the value for
   ffm_striping_unit_size MUST default to zero.  The only supported
   mapping scheme is sparse and is detailed in Section 10.  Note that
   there is an assumption here that both the stripe unit size and the
   number of stripes are the same across all mirrors.

   The ffl_mirrors field represents an array of state information for
   each mirrored copy of the current layout segment.  Each element is
   described by a ffv2_mirror4 type.

   ffv2ds_deviceid provides the deviceid of the storage device holding
   the data file.

   ffv2ds_file_info is an array of ffv2_file_info4 structures, each
   pairing a filehandle (fffi_fh_vers) with a stateid (fffi_stateid).
   There MUST be exactly as many elements in ffv2ds_file_info as there
   are in ffda_versions.  Each element of the array corresponds to a
   particular combination of ffdv_version, ffdv_minorversion, and
   ffdv_tightly_coupled provided for the device.  The array allows for
   server implementations that have different filehandles and stateids
   for different combinations of version, minor version, and coupling
   strength.  See Section 9.14 for how to handle versioning issues
   between the client and storage devices.

   For tight coupling, fffi_stateid provides the stateid to be used by
   the client to access the file.  The metadata server registers
   fffi_stateid with each tight-coupling-capable storage device via
   TRUST_STATEID (see Section 6.4) before returning the layout; the
   storage device validates subsequent CHUNK operations against its
   trust table.

   For loose coupling and an NFSv4 storage device, the client MUST use
   the anonymous stateid to perform I/O on the storage device, because
   the metadata server stateid has no meaning to a storage device that
   is not participating in the control protocol.  In this case the
   metadata server MUST set fffi_stateid to the anonymous stateid.

   This specification of the fffi_stateid restricts both models for
   NFSv4.x storage protocols:

   loosely couple  the stateid has to be an anonymous stateid

   tightly couple  the stateid has to be a global stateid

   By pairing each fffi_fh_vers with its own fffi_stateid inside
   ffv2_file_info4, the v2 layout addresses the v1 limitation where a
   singleton stateid was shared across all filehandles.  Each open file
   on the storage device can now have its own stateid, eliminating the
   ambiguity present in the v1 structure.

   For loosely coupled storage devices, ffv2ds_user and ffv2ds_group
   provide the synthetic user and group to be used in the RPC
   credentials that the client presents to the storage device to access
   the data files.  For tightly coupled storage devices, the user and
   group on the storage device will be the same as on the metadata
   server; that is, if ffdv_tightly_coupled (see Section 8.1) is set,
   then the client MUST ignore both ffv2ds_user and ffv2ds_group.

   The allowed values for both ffv2ds_user and ffv2ds_group are
   specified as owner and owner_group, respectively, in Section 5.9 of
   [RFC8881].  For NFSv3 compatibility, user and group strings that
   consist of decimal numeric values with no leading zeros can be given
   a special interpretation by clients and servers that choose to
   provide such support.  The receiver may treat such a user or group
   string as representing the same user as would be represented by an
   NFSv3 uid or gid having the corresponding numeric value.  Note that
   if using Kerberos for security, the expectation is that these values
   will be a name@domain string.

   ffv2ds_efficiency describes the metadata server's evaluation as to
   the effectiveness of each mirror.  Note that this is per layout and
   not per device as the metric may change due to perceived load,
   availability to the metadata server, etc.  Higher values denote
   higher perceived utility.  The way the client can select the best
   mirror to access is discussed in Section 12.1.1.

9.11.1.  Error Codes from LAYOUTGET

   [RFC8881] provides little guidance as to how the client is to proceed
   with a LAYOUTGET that returns an error of either
   NFS4ERR_LAYOUTTRYLATER, NFS4ERR_LAYOUTUNAVAILABLE, and NFS4ERR_DELAY.
   Within the context of this document:

   NFS4ERR_LAYOUTUNAVAILABLE  there is no layout available and the I/O
      is to go to the metadata server.  Note that it is possible to have
      had a layout before a recall and not after.

   NFS4ERR_LAYOUTTRYLATER  there is some issue preventing the layout
      from being granted.  If the client already has an appropriate
      layout, it should continue with I/O to the storage devices.

   NFS4ERR_DELAY  there is some issue preventing the layout from being
      granted.  If the client already has an appropriate layout, it
      should not continue with I/O to the storage devices.

9.11.2.  Client Interactions with FF_FLAGS_NO_IO_THRU_MDS

   Even if the metadata server provides the FF_FLAGS_NO_IO_THRU_MDS
   flag, the client can still perform I/O to the metadata server.  The
   flag functions as a hint.  The flag indicates to the client that the
   metadata server prefers to separate the metadata I/O from the data I/
   O, most likely for performance reasons.

9.12.  LAYOUTCOMMIT

   The flexible file layout does not use lou_body inside the
   loca_layoutupdate argument to LAYOUTCOMMIT.  If lou_type is
   LAYOUT4_FLEX_FILES, the lou_body field MUST have a zero length (see
   Section 18.42.1 of [RFC8881]).

9.13.  Interactions between Devices and Layouts

   The file layout type is defined such that the relationship between
   multipathing and filehandles can result in either 0, 1, or N
   filehandles (see Section 13.3 of [RFC8881]).  Some rationales for
   this are clustered servers that share the same filehandle or allow
   for multiple read-only copies of the file on the same storage device.
   In the flexible file layout type, while there is an array of
   filehandles, they are independent of the multipathing being used.  If
   the metadata server wants to provide multiple read-only copies of the
   same file on the same storage device, then it should provide multiple
   mirrored instances, each with a different ff_device_addr4.  The
   client can then determine that, since each of the fffi_fh_vers values
   within ffv2ds_file_info are different, there are multiple copies of
   the file for the current layout segment available.

9.14.  Handling Version Errors

   When the metadata server provides the ffda_versions array in the
   ff_device_addr4 (see Section 8.1), the client is able to determine
   whether or not it can access a storage device with any of the
   supplied combinations of ffdv_version, ffdv_minorversion, and
   ffdv_tightly_coupled.  However, due to the limitations of reporting
   errors in GETDEVICEINFO (see Section 18.40 in [RFC8881]), the client
   is not able to specify which specific device it cannot communicate
   with over one of the provided ffdv_version and ffdv_minorversion
   combinations.  Using ff_ioerr4 (Section 15.1.1) inside either the
   LAYOUTRETURN (see Section 18.44 of [RFC8881]) or the LAYOUTERROR (see
   Section 15.6 of [RFC7862] and Section 16 of this document), the
   client can isolate the problematic storage device.

   The error code to return for LAYOUTRETURN and/or LAYOUTERROR is
   NFS4ERR_MINOR_VERS_MISMATCH.  It does not matter whether the mismatch
   is a major version (e.g., client can use NFSv3 but not NFSv4) or
   minor version (e.g., client can use NFSv4.1 but not NFSv4.2), the
   error indicates that for all the supplied combinations for
   ffdv_version and ffdv_minorversion, the client cannot communicate
   with the storage device.  The client can retry the GETDEVICEINFO to
   see if the metadata server can provide a different combination, or it
   can fall back to doing the I/O through the metadata server.

10.  Striping via Sparse Mapping

   While other layout types support both dense and sparse mapping of
   logical offsets to physical offsets within a file (see, for example,
   Section 13.4 of [RFC8881]), the flexible file layout type only
   supports a sparse mapping.

   With sparse mappings, the logical offset within a file (L) is also
   the physical offset on the storage device.  As detailed in
   Section 13.4.4 of [RFC8881], this results in holes across each
   storage device that does not contain the current stripe index.

   L: logical offset within the file

   W: stripe width
       W = number of elements in ffs_data_servers

   S: number of bytes in a stripe
       S = W * ffm_striping_unit_size

   N: stripe number
       N = L / S

                       Figure 23: Stripe Mapping Math

11.  Recovering from Client I/O Errors

   The pNFS client may encounter errors when directly accessing the
   storage devices.  However, it is the responsibility of the metadata
   server to recover from the I/O errors.  When the LAYOUT4_FLEX_FILES
   layout type is used, the client MUST report the I/O errors to the
   server at LAYOUTRETURN time using the ff_ioerr4 structure (see
   Section 15.1.1).

   The metadata server analyzes the error and determines the required
   recovery operations such as recovering media failures or
   reconstructing missing data files.

   The metadata server MUST recall any outstanding layouts to allow it
   exclusive write access to the stripes being recovered and to prevent
   other clients from hitting the same error condition.  In these cases,
   the server MUST complete recovery before handing out any new layouts
   to the affected byte ranges.

   Although the client implementation has the option to propagate a
   corresponding error to the application that initiated the I/O
   operation and drop any unwritten data, the client should attempt to
   retry the original I/O operation by either requesting a new layout or
   sending the I/O via regular NFSv4.1+ READ or WRITE operations to the
   metadata server.  The client SHOULD attempt to retrieve a new layout
   and retry the I/O operation using the storage device first and only
   retry the I/O operation via the metadata server if the error
   persists.

12.  Client-Side Protection Modes

12.1.  Client-Side Mirroring

   The flexible file layout type has a simple model in place for the
   mirroring of the file data constrained by a layout segment.  There is
   no assumption that each copy of the mirror is stored identically on
   the storage devices.  For example, one device might employ
   compression or deduplication on the data.  However, the over-the-wire
   transfer of the file contents MUST appear identical.  Note, this is a
   constraint of the selected XDR representation in which each mirrored
   copy of the layout segment has the same striping pattern (see
   Figure 20).

   The metadata server is responsible for determining the number of
   mirrored copies and the location of each mirror.  While the client
   may provide a hint to how many copies it wants (see Section 9.11),
   the metadata server can ignore that hint; in any event, the client
   has no means to dictate either the storage device (which also means
   the coupling and/or protocol levels to access the layout segments) or
   the location of said storage device.

   The updating of mirrored layout segments is done via client-side
   mirroring.  With this approach, the client is responsible for making
   sure modifications are made on all copies of the layout segments it
   is informed of via the layout.  If a layout segment is being
   resilvered to a storage device, that mirrored copy will not be in the
   layout.  Thus, the metadata server MUST update that copy until the
   client is presented it in a layout.  If the FF_FLAGS_WRITE_ONE_MIRROR
   is set in ffl_flags, the client need only update one of the mirrors
   (see Section 12.1.2).  If the client is writing to the layout
   segments via the metadata server, then the metadata server MUST
   update all copies of the mirror.  As seen in Section 12.1.3, during
   the resilvering, the layout is recalled, and the client has to make
   modifications via the metadata server.

12.1.1.  Selecting a Mirror

   When the metadata server grants a layout to a client, it MAY let the
   client know how fast it expects each mirror to be once the request
   arrives at the storage devices via the ffv2ds_efficiency member.
   While the algorithms to calculate that value are left to the metadata
   server implementations, factors that could contribute to that
   calculation include speed of the storage device, physical memory
   available to the device, operating system version, current load, etc.

   However, what should not be involved in that calculation is a
   perceived network distance between the client and the storage device.
   The client is better situated for making that determination based on
   past interaction with the storage device over the different available
   network interfaces between the two; that is, the metadata server
   might not know about a transient outage between the client and
   storage device because it has no presence on the given subnet.

   As such, it is the client that decides which mirror to access for
   reading the file.  The requirements for writing to mirrored layout
   segments are presented below.

12.1.2.  Writing to Mirrors

12.1.2.1.  Single Storage Device Updates Mirrors

   If the FF_FLAGS_WRITE_ONE_MIRROR flag in ffl_flags is set, the client
   only needs to update one of the copies of the layout segment.  For
   this case, the storage device MUST ensure that all copies of the
   mirror are updated when any one of the mirrors is updated.  If the
   storage device gets an error when updating one of the mirrors, then
   it MUST inform the client that the original WRITE had an error.  The
   client then MUST inform the metadata server (see Section 12.1.2.3).
   The client's responsibility with respect to COMMIT is explained in
   Section 12.1.2.4.  The client may choose any one of the mirrors and
   may use ffv2ds_efficiency as described in Section 12.1.1 when making
   this choice.

12.1.2.2.  Client Updates All Mirrors

   If the FF_FLAGS_WRITE_ONE_MIRROR flag in ffl_flags is not set, the
   client is responsible for updating all mirrored copies of the layout
   segments that it is given in the layout.  A single failed update is
   sufficient to fail the entire operation.  If all but one copy is
   updated successfully and the last one provides an error, then the
   client needs to inform the metadata server about the error.  The
   client can use either LAYOUTRETURN or LAYOUTERROR to inform the
   metadata server that the update failed to that storage device.  If
   the client is updating the mirrors serially, then it SHOULD stop at
   the first error encountered and report that to the metadata server.
   If the client is updating the mirrors in parallel, then it SHOULD
   wait until all storage devices respond so that it can report all
   errors encountered during the update.

12.1.2.3.  Handling Write Errors

   When the client reports a write error to the metadata server, the
   metadata server is responsible for determining if it wants to remove
   the errant mirror from the layout, if the mirror has recovered from
   some transient error, etc.  When the client tries to get a new
   layout, the metadata server informs it of the decision by the
   contents of the layout.  The client MUST NOT assume that the contents
   of the previous layout will match those of the new one.  If it has
   updates that were not committed to all mirrors, then it MUST resend
   those updates to all mirrors.

   There is no provision in the protocol for the metadata server to
   directly determine that the client has or has not recovered from an
   error.  For example, if a storage device was network partitioned from
   the client and the client reported the error to the metadata server,
   then the network partition would be repaired, and all of the copies
   would be successfully updated.  There is no mechanism for the client
   to report that fact, and the metadata server is forced to repair the
   file across the mirror.

   If the client supports NFSv4.2, it can use LAYOUTERROR and
   LAYOUTRETURN to provide hints to the metadata server about the
   recovery efforts.  A LAYOUTERROR on a file is for a non-fatal error.
   A subsequent LAYOUTRETURN without a ff_ioerr4 indicates that the
   client successfully replayed the I/O to all mirrors.  Any
   LAYOUTRETURN with a ff_ioerr4 is an error that the metadata server
   needs to repair.  The client MUST be prepared for the LAYOUTERROR to
   trigger a CB_LAYOUTRECALL if the metadata server determines it needs
   to start repairing the file.

12.1.2.4.  Handling Write COMMITs

   When stable writes are done to the metadata server or to a single
   replica (if allowed by the use of FF_FLAGS_WRITE_ONE_MIRROR), it is
   the responsibility of the receiving node to propagate the written
   data stably, before replying to the client.

   In the corresponding cases in which unstable writes are done, the
   receiving node does not have any such obligation, although it may
   choose to asynchronously propagate the updates.  However, once a
   COMMIT is replied to, all replicas must reflect the writes that have
   been done, and this data must have been committed to stable storage
   on all replicas.

   In order to avoid situations in which stale data is read from
   replicas to which writes have not been propagated:

   *  A client that has outstanding unstable writes made to single node
      (metadata server or storage device) MUST do all reads from that
      same node.

   *  When writes are flushed to the server (for example, to implement
      close-to-open semantics), a COMMIT must be done by the client to
      ensure that up-to-date written data will be available irrespective
      of the particular replica read.

12.1.3.  Metadata Server Resilvering of the File

   The metadata server may elect to create a new mirror of the layout
   segments at any time.  This might be to resilver a copy on a storage
   device that was down for servicing, to provide a copy of the layout
   segments on storage with different storage performance
   characteristics, etc.  As the client will not be aware of the new
   mirror and the metadata server will not be aware of updates that the
   client is making to the layout segments, the metadata server MUST
   recall the writable layout segment(s) that it is resilvering.  If the
   client issues a LAYOUTGET for a writable layout segment that is in
   the process of being resilvered, then the metadata server can deny
   that request with an NFS4ERR_LAYOUTUNAVAILABLE.  The client would
   then have to perform the I/O through the metadata server.

12.2.  Erasure Coding

   Erasure Coding takes a data block and transforms it to a payload to
   send to the data servers (see Figure 24).  It generates a metadata
   header and transformed block per data server.  The header is metadata
   information for the transformed block.  From now on, the metadata is
   simply referred to as the header and the transformed block as the
   chunk.  The payload of a data block is the set of generated headers
   and chunks for that data block.

   The guard is an unique identifier generated by the client to describe
   the current write transaction (see Section 25.1).  The intent is to
   have a unique and non-opaque value for comparison.  The payload_id
   describes the position within the payload.  Finally, the crc32 is the
   32 bit crc calculation of the header (with the crc32 field being 0)
   and the chunk.  By combining the two parts of the payload, integrity
   is ensured for both the parts.

   While the data block might have a length of 4kB, that does not
   necessarily mean that the length of the chunk is 4kB.  That length is
   determined by the erasure coding type algorithm.  For example, Reed
   Solomon might have 4kB chunks with the data integrity being
   compromised by parity chunks.  Another example would be the Mojette
   Transformation, which might have 1kB chunk lengths.

   The payload contains redundancy which will allow the erasure coding
   type algorithm to repair chunks in the payload as it is transformed
   back to a data block (see Figure 29).

   The protocol provides two levels of payload integrity, consumed at
   different points in the read path:

   Consistency:  A payload is *consistent* when all of the chunks that
      belong to it carry the same chunk_guard4 value (see Section 25.1).
      Consistency alone does NOT imply the bytes are free of corruption;
      it means only that every chunk in the payload came from the same
      write transaction.  A reader detects inconsistency when it
      assembles a payload and finds differing chunk_guard4 values across
      chunks.

   Integrity:  A payload has *integrity* when it is consistent AND every
      contained chunk passes its CRC32 check.  Integrity is the
      precondition for returning the payload's data block to the
      application.

   The separation matters because the two checks detect different
   failure modes.  Consistency detects protocol-level failures (racing
   writers, partial writes, rollback windows); the CRC32 detects byte-
   level corruption (network errors, media errors, software bugs in the
   erasure transform).  Neither subsumes the other.

   The two-level integrity model also reflects a deeper property of
   distributed writes: *last-writer-wins does not apply to a payload
   spread across independent data servers.* The ordering of writes
   arriving at one data server may differ from the ordering arriving at
   another; the "last" write on DSa may well be the "first" on DSc.  The
   chunk_guard4 CAS primitive (see Section 25.1) resolves this by
   serializing concurrent writers per chunk rather than by imposing a
   global order.

   The erasure coding algorithm itself might not be sufficient to detect
   all byte-level errors in the chunks.  The CRC32 checks allow the data
   server to detect chunks with integrity issues; the erasure decoding
   algorithm can then reconstruct the affected chunks from the remaining
   integral chunks in the payload.

12.2.1.  Encoding a Data Block

                    +-------------+
                    | data block  |
                    +-------+-----+
                            |
                            |
      +---------------------+-------------------------------+
      |            Erasure Encoding (Transform Forward)     |
      +---+----------------------+---------------------+----+
          |                      |                     |
          |                      |                     |
      +---+------------+     +---+------------+     +--+-------------+
      | HEADER         | ... | HEADER         | ... | HEADER         |
      +----------------+     +----------------+     +----------------+
      | guard:         | ... | guard:         | ... | guard:         |
      |   gen_id   : 3 | ... |   gen_id   : 3 | ... |   gen_id   : 3 |
      |   client_id: 6 | ... |   client_id: 6 | ... |   client_id: 6 |
      | payload_id : 0 | ... | payload_id : M | ... | payload_id : 5 |
      | crc32   :      | ... | crc32   :      | ... | crc32   :      |
      +----------------+     +----------------+     +----------------+
      | CHUNK          | ... | CHUNK          | ... | CHUNK          |
      +----------------+     +----------------+     +----------------+
      | data: ....     | ... | data: ....     | ... | data: ....     |
      +----------------+     +----------------+     +----------------+
        Data Server 1          Data Server N          Data Server 6

                      Figure 24: Encoding a Data Block

   Each data block of the file resident in the client's cache of the
   file will be encoded into N different payloads to be sent to the data
   servers as shown in Figure 24.  As CHUNK_WRITE (see Section 26.10)
   can encode multiple write_chunk4 into a single transaction, a more
   accurate description of a CHUNK_WRITE is in Figure 25.

     +------------------------------------+
     | CHUNK_WRITEargs                    |
     +------------------------------------+
     | cwa_stateid: 0                     |
     | cwa_offset: 1                      |
     | cwa_stable: FILE_SYNC4             |
     | cwa_payload_id: 0                  |
     | cwa_owner:                         |
     |            co_guard:               |
     |                cg_gen_id   : 3     |
     |                cg_client_id: 6     |
     | cwa_chunk_size  :  1048            |
     | cwa_crc32s:                        |
     |         [0]:  0x32ef89             |
     |         [1]:  0x56fa89             |
     |         [2]:  0x7693af             |
     | cwa_chunks  :  ......              |
     +------------------------------------+

                   Figure 25: Example of CHUNK_WRITE_args

   This describes a 3 block write of data from an offset of 1 block in
   the file.  As each block shares the cwa_owner, it is only presented
   once.  I.e., the data server will be able to construct the header for
   the i'th chunk from the cwa_chunks from the cwa_payload_id, the
   cwa_owner, and the i'th crc32 from the cw_crc32s.  The cwa_chunks are
   sent together as a byte stream to increase performance.

   Assuming that there were no issues, Figure 26 illustrates the
   results.  The payload sequence id is implicit in the CHUNK_WRITEargs.

     +-------------------------------+
     | CHUNK_WRITEresok              |
     +-------------------------------+
     | cwr_count: 3                  |
     | cwr_committed: FILE_SYNC4     |
     | cwr_writeverf: 0xf1234abc     |
     | cwr_owners[0]:                |
     |        co_chunk_id: 1         |
     |        co_guard:              |
     |            cg_gen_id   : 3    |
     |            cg_client_id: 6    |
     | cwr_owners[1]:                |
     |        co_chunk_id: 2         |
     |        co_guard:              |
     |            cg_gen_id   : 3    |
     |            cg_client_id: 6    |
     | cwr_owners[2]:                |
     |        co_chunk_id: 3         |
     |        co_guard:              |
     |            cg_gen_id   : 3    |
     |            cg_client_id: 6    |
     +-------------------------------+

                   Figure 26: Example of CHUNK_WRITE_res

12.2.1.1.  Calculating the CRC32

     +---+----------------+
     | HEADER             |
     +--------------------+
     | guard:             |
     |   gen_id   : 7     |
     |   client_id: 6     |
     | payload_id : 0     |
     | crc32   : 0        |
     +--------------------+
     | CHUNK              |
     +--------------------+
     | data:  ....        |
     +--------------------+
           Data Server 1

                    Figure 27: CRC32 Before Calculation

   Assuming the header and payload as in Figure 27, the crc32 needs to
   be calculated in order to fill in the cw_crc field.  In this case,
   the crc32 is calculated over the 4 fields as shown in the header and
   the cw_chunk.  In this example, it is calculated to be 0x21de8.  The
   resulting CHUNK_WRITE is shown in Figure 28.

     +------------------------------------+
     | CHUNK_WRITEargs                    |
     +------------------------------------+
     | cwa_stateid: 0                     |
     | cwa_offset: 1                      |
     | cwa_stable: FILE_SYNC4             |
     | cwa_payload_id: 0                  |
     | cwa_owner:                         |
     |            co_guard:               |
     |                cg_gen_id   : 7     |
     |                cg_client_id: 6     |
     | cwa_chunk_size  :  1048            |
     | cwa_crc32s:                        |
     |         [0]:  0x21de8              |
     | cwa_chunks  :  ......              |
     +------------------------------------+

                     Figure 28: CRC32 After Calculation

12.2.2.  Decoding a Data Block

       Data Server 1          Data Server N          Data Server 6
     +----------------+     +----------------+     +----------------+
     | HEADER         | ... | HEADER         | ... | HEADER         |
     +----------------+     +----------------+     +----------------+
     | guard:         | ... | guard:         | ... | guard:         |
     |   gen_id   : 3 | ... |   gen_id   : 3 | ... |   gen_id   : 3 |
     |   client_id: 6 | ... |   client_id: 6 | ... |   client_id: 6 |
     | payload_id : 0 | ... | payload_id : M | ... | payload_id : 5 |
     | crc32   :      | ... | crc32   :      | ... | crc32   :      |
     +----------------+     +----------------+     +----------------+
     | CHUNK          | ... | CHUNK          | ... | CHUNK          |
     +----------------+     +----------------+     +----------------+
     | data: ....     | ... | data: ....     | ... | data: ....     |
     +---+------------+     +--+-------------+     +-+--------------+
         |                     |                     |
         |                     |                     |
     +---+---------------------+---------------------+-----+
     |            Erasure Decoding (Transform Reverse)     |
     +---------------------+-------------------------------+
                           |
                           |
                   +-------+-----+
                   | data block  |
                   +-------------+

                      Figure 29: Decoding a Data Block

   When reading chunks via a CHUNK_READ operation, the client will
   decode them into data blocks as shown in Figure 29.

   At this time, the client could detect issues in the integrity of the
   data.  The handling and repair are out of the scope of this document
   and MUST be addressed in the document describing each erasure coding
   type.

12.2.2.1.  Checking the CRC32

     +------------------------------------+
     | CHUNK_READresok                    |
     +------------------------------------+
     | crr_eof: false                     |
     | crr_chunks[0]:                     |
     |        cr_crc: 0x21de8             |
     |        cr_owner:                   |
     |            co_guard:               |
     |                cg_gen_id   : 7     |
     |                cg_client_id: 6     |
     |        cr_chunk  :  ......         |
     +------------------------------------+

                        Figure 30: CRC32 on the Wire

   Assuming the CHUNK_READ results as in Figure 30, the crc32 needs to
   be checked in order to ensure data integrity.  Conceptually, a header
   and payload can be built as shown in Figure 31.  The crc32 is
   calculated over the 4 fields as shown in the header and the cr_chunk.
   In this example, it is calculated to be 0x21de8.  Thus this payload
   for the data server has data integrity.

     +---+----------------+
     | HEADER             |
     +--------------------+
     | guard:             |
     |   gen_id   : 7     |
     |   client_id: 6     |
     | payload_id  : 0    |
     | crc32    : 0       |
     +--------------------+
     | CHUNK              |
     +--------------------+
     | data:  ....        |
     +--------------------+
          Data Server 1

                       Figure 31: CRC32 Being Checked

12.2.3.  Write Modes

   There are two basic writing modes for erasure coding and they depend
   on the metadata server using FFV2_FLAGS_ONLY_ONE_WRITER in the
   ffl_flags in the ffv2_layout4 (see Figure 19) to inform the client
   whether it is the only writer to the file or not.  If it is the only
   writer, then CHUNK_WRITE with the cwa_guard not set can be used to
   write chunks.  In this scenario, there is no write contention, but
   write holes can occur as the client overwrites old data.  Thus the
   client does not need guarded writes, but it does need the ability to
   rollback writes.  If it is not the only writer, then CHUNK_WRITE with
   the cwa_guard set MUST be used to write chunks.  In this scenario,
   the write holes can also be caused by multiple clients writing to the
   same chunk.  Thus the client needs guarded writes to prevent over
   writes and it does need the ability to rollback writes.

   In both modes, clients MUST NOT overwrite payloads which already
   contain inconsistency.  This directly follows from Section 12.2.7 and
   MUST be handled as discussed there.  Once consistency in the payload
   has been detected, the client can use those chunks as a basis for
   read/modify/update.

   CHUNK_WRITE is a two pass operation in cooperation with
   CHUNK_FINALIZE (Section 26.3) and CHUNK_ROLLBACK (Section 26.8).  It
   writes to the data file and the data server is responsible for
   retaining a copy of the old header and chunk.  A subsequent
   CHUNK_READ would return the new chunk.  However, until either the
   CHUNK_FINALIZE or CHUNK_ROLLBACK is presented, a subsequent
   CHUNK_WRITE MUST result in the locking of the chunk, as if a
   CHUNK_LOCK (Section 26.5) had been performed on the chunk.  As such,
   further CHUNK_WRITES by any client MUST be denied until the chunk is
   unlocked by CHUNK_UNLOCK (Section 26.9).

   If the CHUNK_WRITE results in a consistent data block, then the
   client will send a CHUNK_FINALIZE in a subsequent compound to inform
   the data server that the chunk is consistent and can be overwritten
   by another CHUNK_WRITE.

   If the CHUNK_WRITE results in an inconsistent data block, or if the
   data server returns NFS4ERR_CHUNK_LOCKED, the client reports the
   condition to the metadata server via LAYOUTERROR with an error code
   of NFS4ERR_PAYLOAD_NOT_CONSISTENT.

12.2.4.  Selecting the Repair Client

   The metadata server is the authority that selects which client (or,
   in a tightly coupled deployment, which data server) repairs an
   inconsistent payload.  This is analogous to the way the metadata
   server assigns per-mirror priority via ffv2ds_efficiency (see
   Section 12.1.1): the protocol does not prescribe the selection
   algorithm, and each deployment MAY tune its policy.

   Implementations MAY consider factors such as:

   *  Whether a client holds an active write layout on the affected
      payload (the client most likely to hold surviving shards in
      cache).

   *  Whether a client has previously reported consistent shards to the
      metadata server via LAYOUTSTATS or a prior LAYOUTERROR.

   *  Whether the layout exposes a data server carrying
      FFV2_DS_FLAGS_REPAIR as a target for reconstructed shards.

   *  Network proximity, observed latency, or recent client load -- the
      same class of information that informs ffv2ds_efficiency.

   The selection algorithm is not normative.  What is normative is that
   every client MUST be prepared to:

   1.  Receive a repair request for a payload that the client does not
       have an outstanding write layout on, and did not write; and

   2.  Continue its own workload after reporting
       NFS4ERR_PAYLOAD_NOT_CONSISTENT without itself being selected to
       repair the payload it reported.

   The metadata server signals the selected client via the
   CB_CHUNK_REPAIR callback (Section 27.1), which identifies the file,
   the affected ranges (each with its own triggering nfsstat4), and a
   wall-clock deadline.  A client that receives CB_CHUNK_REPAIR for a
   file for which it does not already hold a layout MUST acquire a
   layout via LAYOUTGET before attempting the repair.

12.2.5.  Repair Protocol: Normative vs. Informative

   The selection algorithm is non-normative and deployment-tunable.  The
   externally-observable state transitions of the repair flow are
   normative.  The line between the two is drawn at what another party
   on the wire -- the metadata server, another client, a reader -- can
   observe.  What no other party can see (client-internal ordering,
   retry policy, whether to CHUNK_READ first to confirm the failure) is
   left to implementations.

   The following requirements are normative.  An implementation that
   violates any of these can leak inconsistency or write-holes into the
   cluster:

   1.  *Final state flat.* Every shard in every range identified in a
       CB_CHUNK_REPAIR MUST reach either the COMMITTED state (repaired)
       or the EMPTY state (rolled back).  No shard is left in PENDING or
       FINALIZED indefinitely.

   2.  *Lock before write.* The repair client MUST adopt the lock on
       every affected range via CHUNK_LOCK with CHUNK_LOCK_FLAGS_ADOPT
       (Section 26.5) before issuing any CHUNK_WRITE_REPAIR,
       CHUNK_ROLLBACK, or CHUNK_WRITE on a chunk in that range.  The
       lock on the affected chunks is held continuously from the failure
       that triggered CB_CHUNK_REPAIR through the adoption; at no point
       is the range unlocked.

   3.  *Clear the errored state.* On the reconstruction path, the repair
       client MUST issue CHUNK_REPAIRED (Section 26.7) after
       CHUNK_COMMIT.  Without it, readers continue to see holes
       regardless of on-disk state.

   4.  *Release locks explicitly.* CHUNK_ROLLBACK does not release chunk
       locks.  On the rollback path the client MUST issue CHUNK_UNLOCK
       (Section 26.9) on each affected chunk.  A client that walks away
       without either completing CHUNK_REPAIRED or issuing CHUNK_UNLOCK
       holds the locks until lease expiry, blocking progress for other
       writers.

   5.  *Deadline honored.* The client MUST drive every range to its
       final flat state before ccra_deadline, or MUST respond to the
       CB_CHUNK_REPAIR with NFS4ERR_DELAY (requesting an extension),
       NFS4ERR_CODING_NOT_SUPPORTED (declining), or NFS4ERR_PAYLOAD_LOST
       (declaring the data unrecoverable).  A deadline that elapses
       without any of these leaves the metadata server free to re-
       select; the client MUST NOT continue repair-related CHUNK
       operations after the deadline without first re-verifying its
       layout and the chunk lock state.

   6.  *Terminal return codes.* NFS4ERR_CODING_NOT_SUPPORTED MUST mean
       "decline; select another client."  NFS4ERR_PAYLOAD_LOST MUST mean
       "the data is not recoverable; do not retry."  The metadata server
       relies on these to decide whether to re-issue.

   The following aspects are informative / implementation-defined:

   *  Choice between the reconstruction path (CHUNK_WRITE_REPAIR) and
      the rollback path (CHUNK_ROLLBACK) on a given range.  The protocol
      MUST support both; the client MAY use either based on its local
      state and whether reconstruction is feasible from surviving
      shards.

   *  Ordering among multiple affected ranges in a single
      CB_CHUNK_REPAIR (parallel or serial).

   *  Whether to issue CHUNK_READ to confirm the failure mode before
      reconstructing.

   *  Retry policy on transient CHUNK_WRITE_REPAIR errors below the
      deadline cutoff.

   *  How the repair status is surfaced to local filesystem API callers.

12.2.6.  Carrying Out the Repair

   With the normative framing above, the reconstruction path is:

   1.  CHUNK_LOCK with CHUNK_LOCK_FLAGS_ADOPT on each affected range
       (Section 26.5).

   2.  CHUNK_WRITE_REPAIR (Section 26.11) with the reconstructed data
       for each inconsistent shard.  The client's chunk_owner4 on this
       and all subsequent operations is the one it presented in the
       CHUNK_LOCK ADOPT above; prior owners' generation ids are now
       historical.

   3.  CHUNK_FINALIZE (Section 26.3) and CHUNK_COMMIT (Section 26.1) to
       persist the repaired shards.

   4.  CHUNK_REPAIRED (Section 26.7) to clear the errored state.

   The rollback path, when reconstruction is not possible:

   1.  CHUNK_LOCK with CHUNK_LOCK_FLAGS_ADOPT on each affected range.

   2.  CHUNK_ROLLBACK (Section 26.8) on each affected shard to restore
       the previously committed content.

   3.  CHUNK_UNLOCK (Section 26.9) on each shard.

   In both paths, the repair client SHOULD target reconstructed shards
   according to the following fallback order: first, any data server in
   the layout carrying FFV2_DS_FLAGS_REPAIR; then the data server that
   reported the failure (the one carrying the failing shard at the range
   identified by ccr_offset and ccr_count in the CB_CHUNK_REPAIR
   argument); then, if both of the above are unreachable, a data server
   carrying FFV2_DS_FLAGS_SPARE.  If none of the above are available,
   the client MUST return NFS4ERR_PAYLOAD_LOST on the CB_CHUNK_REPAIR
   response.

12.2.6.1.  Single Writer Mode

   In single writer mode, the metadata server sets
   FFV2_FLAGS_ONLY_ONE_WRITER in ffl_flags, indicating that no other
   client holds a write layout for the file.  The client sends
   CHUNK_WRITE with cwa_guard.cwg_check set to FALSE, omitting the guard
   value.  Because only one writer is active, there is no risk of two
   clients overwriting the same chunk concurrently.

   The single writer write sequence is:

   1.  The client issues CHUNK_WRITE (cwa_guard.cwg_check = FALSE) for
       each shard.  The data server places the written block in the
       PENDING state and retains a copy of the previous block for
       rollback.

   2.  The client issues CHUNK_FINALIZE to advance the blocks from
       PENDING to FINALIZED, validating the per-block CRC32.

   3.  The client issues CHUNK_COMMIT to advance the blocks from
       FINALIZED to COMMITTED, persisting the block metadata to stable
       storage.

   If the client detects an error after CHUNK_WRITE but before
   CHUNK_FINALIZE (e.g., a CRC mismatch on a subsequent CHUNK_READ), it
   issues CHUNK_ROLLBACK to restore the previous block content.
   CHUNK_ROLLBACK does not lock the chunk; the next CHUNK_WRITE is
   permitted immediately.

12.2.6.2.  Repairing Single Writer Payloads

   In single writer mode, inconsistent blocks arise from a client or
   data server failure during a CHUNK_WRITE / CHUNK_FINALIZE sequence.
   Because no other writer is active, the original writer is the typical
   choice for repair, but the metadata server MAY designate any client
   according to the rules in Section 12.2.4.  A designated client that
   did not originate the writes MUST follow the rollback path of that
   section if it cannot reconstruct the payload from surviving shards.

   The repair sequence when the selected client is the original writer
   is:

   1.  The repair client issues CHUNK_READ to identify which blocks are
       in an inconsistent state (PENDING with a CRC mismatch, or in the
       errored state set by a prior CHUNK_ERROR).

   2.  For each errored block, the repair client reconstructs the
       correct data using the erasure coding algorithm (RS matrix
       inversion or Mojette back-projection) from the surviving
       consistent blocks.

   3.  The repair client issues CHUNK_WRITE_REPAIR (Section 26.11) to
       write the reconstructed data.  CHUNK_WRITE_REPAIR bypasses the
       guard check and applies different data server policies (e.g.,
       allowing writes to blocks in the errored state).

   4.  The repair client issues CHUNK_FINALIZE and CHUNK_COMMIT to
       persist the repaired blocks.

   5.  The repair client issues CHUNK_REPAIRED (Section 26.7) to clear
       the errored state and make the blocks available for normal reads.

12.2.6.3.  Multiple Writer Mode

   In multiple writer mode, the metadata server does not set
   FFV2_FLAGS_ONLY_ONE_WRITER, indicating that concurrent writers may
   hold write layouts for the file.  The client sends CHUNK_WRITE with
   cwa_guard.cwg_check set to TRUE, supplying a chunk_guard4 in
   cwa_guard.cwg_guard that uniquely identifies this write transaction
   across all data servers.

   The multiple writer write sequence is:

   1.  The client selects a unique chunk_guard4 for this transaction.
       The cg_client_id identifies the client (derived from the client's
       clientid4); the cg_gen_id is a per-client generation counter
       incremented for each new transaction.

   2.  The client issues CHUNK_WRITE (cwa_guard.cwg_check = TRUE) for
       each shard.  The data server checks that no other client's block
       is in the PENDING state for this chunk.  If another client's
       block is already pending, the data server returns
       NFS4ERR_CHUNK_LOCKED with the clr_owner field identifying the
       lock holder.

   3.  On NFS4ERR_CHUNK_LOCKED, the client MUST back off.  It issues
       CHUNK_ROLLBACK for any shards it has already written in this
       transaction, then retries after a delay.

   4.  If all CHUNK_WRITEs succeed, the client issues CHUNK_FINALIZE and
       CHUNK_COMMIT as in single writer mode.

   The guard ensures that the complete set of shards forming a
   consistent erasure-coded block all carry the same chunk_guard4.  A
   reader that encounters shards with different guard values knows the
   payload is not yet consistent and MUST either retry or report
   NFS4ERR_PAYLOAD_NOT_CONSISTENT.

12.2.6.4.  Repairing Multiple Writer Payloads

   In multiple writer mode, inconsistent blocks can arise from two
   sources: a client failure leaving some shards in PENDING state, or
   two clients writing different data to the same chunk before one has
   committed.

   The metadata server coordinates repair by designating a repair client
   according to the rules in Section 12.2.4.  The FFV2_DS_FLAGS_REPAIR
   flag, when present on a data server in the layout, identifies the
   target data server into which reconstructed shards should be written;
   it does not by itself identify the repair client.  The repair
   sequence is:

   1.  The repair client issues CHUNK_LOCK (Section 26.5) on the
       affected block range of each data server.  If any lock attempt
       returns NFS4ERR_CHUNK_LOCKED, the repair client records the
       existing lock holder's chunk_owner4 and proceeds; the lock
       holder's data is a candidate for the winning payload.

   2.  The repair client issues CHUNK_READ on all data servers to
       retrieve the current payload.  It examines the chunk_owner4 of
       each shard to identify which transaction (if any) produced a
       consistent set across all k data shards.

   3.  If a consistent set is found (all k data shards carry the same
       chunk_guard4), that payload is the winner.  The repair client
       issues CHUNK_WRITE_REPAIR to copy the winner's data to any data
       servers whose shard is inconsistent, followed by CHUNK_FINALIZE
       and CHUNK_COMMIT.

   4.  If no consistent set exists (all available payloads are partial),
       the repair client selects one transaction's payload as
       authoritative (typically the one with the most complete set of
       shards, or the most recent cg_gen_id) and proceeds as above.

   5.  After all data servers carry consistent, finalized, committed
       data, the repair client issues CHUNK_REPAIRED to clear the
       errored state and CHUNK_UNLOCK to release the locks acquired in
       step 1.

   6.  The repair client reports success to the metadata server via
       LAYOUTRETURN.

12.2.7.  Reading Chunks

   The client reads chunks from the data file via CHUNK_READ.  The
   number of chunks in the payload that need to be consistent depend on
   both the Erasure Coding Type and the level of protection selected.
   If the client has enough consistent chunks in the payload, then it
   can proceed to use them to build a data block.  If it does not have
   enough consistent chunks in the payload, then it can either decide to
   return a LAYOUTERROR of NFS4ERR_PAYLOAD_NOT_CONSISTENT to the
   metadata server or it can retry the CHUNK_READ until there are enough
   consistent chunks in the payload.

   As another client might be writing to the chunks as they are being
   read, it is entirely possible to read the chunks while they are not
   consistent.  As such, it might even be the non-consistent chunks
   which contain the new data and a better action than building the data
   block is to retry the CHUNK_READ to see if new chunks are
   overwritten.

12.2.8.  Whole File Repair


   // Describe how a repair client can be assigned with missing
   // FFV2_DS_FLAGS_ACTIVE data servers and a number of
   // FFV2_DS_FLAGS_REPAIR data servers.  Then the client will either
   // move chunks from FFV2_DS_FLAGS_SPARE data servers to the
   // FFV2_DS_FLAGS_REPAIR data servers or reconstruct the chunks for
   // the FFV2_DS_FLAGS_REPAIR based on the decoded data blocks, The
   // client indicates success by returning the layout.
   //
   // -- Tom


   // For a slam dunk, introduce the concept of a proxy repair client.
   // I.e., the client appears as a single FFV2_CODING_MIRRORED file to
   // other clients.  As it receives WRITEs, it encodes them to the real
   // set of data servers.  As it receives READs, it decodes them from
   // the real set of data servers.  Once the proxy repair is finished,
   // the metadata server will start pushing out layouts for the real
   // set of data servers.
   //
   // -- Tom

12.3.  Mixing of Coding Types

   Multiple coding types can be present in a Flexible File Version 2
   Layout Type layout.  The ffv2_layout4 has an array of ffv2_mirror4,
   each of which has a ffv2_coding_type4.  The main reason to allow for
   this is to provide for either the assimilation of a non-erasure coded
   file to an erasure coded file or the exporting of an erasure coded
   file to a non-erasure coded file.

   Assume there is an additional ffv2_coding_type4 of
   FFV2_CODING_REED_SOLOMON and it needs 8 active chunks.  The user
   wants to actively assimilate a regular file.  As such, a layout might
   be as represented in Figure 32.  As this is an assimilation, most of
   the data reads will be satisfied by READ (see Section 18.22 of
   [RFC8881]) calls to index 0.  However, as this is also an active
   file, there could also be CHUNK_READ (see Section 26.6) calls to the
   other indexes.

    +-----------------------------------------------------+
    | ffv2_layout4:                                       |
    +-----------------------------------------------------+
    |     ffl_mirrors[0]:                                 |
    |         ffs_data_servers:                           |
    |             ffv2_data_server4[0]                    |
    |                 ffv2ds_flags: 0                     |
    |         ffm_coding: FFV2_CODING_MIRRORED            |
    +-----------------------------------------------------+
    |     ffl_mirrors[1]:                                 |
    |         ffs_data_servers:                           |
    |             ffv2_data_server4[0]                    |
    |                 ffv2ds_flags: FFV2_DS_FLAGS_ACTIVE  |
    |             ffv2_data_server4[1]                    |
    |                 ffv2ds_flags: FFV2_DS_FLAGS_ACTIVE  |
    |             ffv2_data_server4[2]                    |
    |                 ffv2ds_flags: FFV2_DS_FLAGS_ACTIVE  |
    |             ffv2_data_server4[3]                    |
    |                 ffv2ds_flags: FFV2_DS_FLAGS_ACTIVE  |
    |             ffv2_data_server4[4]                    |
    |                 ffv2ds_flags: FFV2_DS_FLAGS_PARITY  |
    |             ffv2_data_server4[5]                    |
    |                 ffv2ds_flags: FFV2_DS_FLAGS_PARITY  |
    |             ffv2_data_server4[6]                    |
    |                 ffv2ds_flags: FFV2_DS_FLAGS_SPARE   |
    |             ffv2_data_server4[7]                    |
    |                 ffv2ds_flags: FFV2_DS_FLAGS_SPARE   |
    |     ffm_coding: FFV2_CODING_REED_SOLOMON            |
    +-----------------------------------------------------+

            Figure 32: Example of Mixed Coding Types in a Layout

   When performing I/O via a FFV2_CODING_MIRRORED coding type, the non-
   transformed data will be used, Whereas with other coding types, a
   metadata header and transformed block will be sent.  Further, when
   reading data from the instance files, the client MUST be prepared to
   have one of the coding types supply data and the other type not to
   supply data.  I.e., the CHUNK_READ call to the data servers in mirror
   1 might return rlr_eof set to true (see Figure 66), which indicates
   that there is no data, where the READ call to the data server in
   mirror 0 might return eof to be false, which indicates that there is
   data.  The client MUST determine that there is in fact data.  An
   example use case is the active assimilation of a file to ensure
   integrity.  As the client is helping to translated the file to the
   new coding scheme, it is actively modifying the file.  As such, it
   might be sequentially reading the file in order to translate.  The
   READ calls to mirror 0 would be returning data and the CHUNK_READ
   calls to mirror 1 would not be returning data.  As the client
   overwrites the file, the WRITE call and CHUNK_WRITE call would have
   data sent to all of the data servers.  Finally, if the client reads
   back a section which had been modified earlier, both the READ and
   CHUNK_READ calls would return data.

12.4.  Reed-Solomon Vandermonde Encoding (FFV2_ENCODING_RS_VANDERMONDE)

12.4.1.  Overview

   Reed-Solomon (RS) codes are Maximum Distance Separable (MDS) codes:
   for a (k+m, k) code, any k of the k+m encoded shards suffice to
   recover the original data.  The code tolerates the simultaneous loss
   of up to m shards.

12.4.2.  Galois Field Arithmetic

   All RS operations are performed over GF(2^8), the Galois field with
   256 elements.  Each element is represented as a byte.

   Irreducible Polynomial  The field is constructed using the
      irreducible polynomial x^8 + x^4 + x^3 + x^2 + 1 (0x11d in
      hexadecimal).  The primitive element (generator) is g = 2, which
      has multiplicative order 255.

   Addition  Addition in GF(2^8) is bitwise XOR.

   Multiplication  Multiplication uses log/antilog tables.  For non-zero
      elements a and b: a * b = exp(log(a) + log(b)), where the exp
      table is doubled to 512 entries to avoid modular reduction on the
      index sum.

   These are the classical constructions from Berlekamp (1968) and
   Peterson & Weldon (1972).  The log/antilog table approach for GF(2^8)
   multiplication predates all known patents on SIMD-accelerated GF
   arithmetic.  Implementors considering SIMD acceleration of GF(2^8)
   operations should be aware of US Patent 8,683,296 (StreamScale),
   which covers certain SIMD-based GF multiplication techniques.

12.4.3.  Encoding Matrix

   The encoding process uses a (k+m) x k Vandermonde matrix, normalized
   so that its top k rows form the identity matrix:

   1.  Construct a (k+m) x k Vandermonde matrix V where V[i][j] = j^i in
       GF(2^8).

   2.  Extract the top k x k sub-matrix T from V.

   3.  Compute T_inv = T^(-1) using Gaussian elimination in GF(2^8).

   4.  Multiply: E = V * T_inv.  The result has an identity block on top
       (rows 0 through k-1) and the parity generation matrix P on the
       bottom (rows k through k+m-1).

   The identity block makes the code systematic: data shards pass
   through unchanged, and only the parity sub-matrix P is needed during
   encoding.

12.4.4.  Encoding

   Given k data shards, each of shard_len bytes, encoding produces m
   parity shards, each also shard_len bytes:

   For each byte position j in [0, shard_len):
     For each parity shard i in [0, m):
       parity[i][j] = sum over s in [0, k) of P[i][s] * data[s][j]

   where the sum and product are in GF(2^8).  All shards (data and
   parity) are the same size.

12.4.5.  Decoding

   When one or more shards are lost (up to m), reconstruction proceeds
   by matrix inversion:

   1.  Select k available shards (from the k+m total).

   2.  Form a k x k sub-matrix S of the encoding matrix E by selecting
       the rows corresponding to the available shards.

   3.  Compute S_inv = S^(-1) using Gaussian elimination in GF(2^8).

   4.  Multiply S_inv by the vector of available shard data at each byte
       position to recover the original k data shards.

   5.  If any parity shards are also missing, regenerate them by re-
       encoding from the recovered data shards.

   The reconstruction cost is dominated by the matrix inversion, which
   is O(k^2) in GF(2^8) multiplications.

12.4.6.  RS Interoperability Requirements

   For two implementations of FFV2_ENCODING_RS_VANDERMONDE to
   interoperate, they MUST agree on all of the following parameters.
   Any deviation produces a different encoding matrix and renders data
   unrecoverable by a different implementation.

   *  Irreducible polynomial: x^8 + x^4 + x^3 + x^2 + 1 (0x11d)

   *  Primitive element: g = 2

   *  Vandermonde evaluation points: V[i][j] = j^i in GF(2^8)

   *  Matrix normalization: E = V * (V[0..k-1])^(-1)

   These four parameters fully determine the encoding matrix for any (k,
   m) configuration.

12.4.7.  RS Shard Sizes

   All RS shards (data and parity) are exactly shard_len bytes.  This
   simplifies the CHUNK operation protocol: chunk_size is exactly the
   shard size for all mirrors.

   +===============+===========+============+===============+==========+
   | Configuration | File Size | Shard Size | Total         | Overhead |
   |               |           |            | Storage       |          |
   +===============+===========+============+===============+==========+
   | 4+2           | 4 KB      | 1 KB       | 6 KB          | 50%      |
   +---------------+-----------+------------+---------------+----------+
   | 4+2           | 1 MB      | 256 KB     | 1.5 MB        | 50%      |
   +---------------+-----------+------------+---------------+----------+
   | 8+2           | 4 KB      | 512 B      | 5 KB          | 25%      |
   +---------------+-----------+------------+---------------+----------+
   | 8+2           | 1 MB      | 128 KB     | 1.25 MB       | 25%      |
   +---------------+-----------+------------+---------------+----------+

             Table 2: RS shard sizes for common configurations

12.5.  Mojette Transform Encoding (FFV2_ENCODING_MOJETTE_SYSTEMATIC,
       FFV2_ENCODING_MOJETTE_NON_SYSTEMATIC)

12.5.1.  Overview

   The Mojette Transform is an erasure coding technique based on
   discrete geometry rather than algebraic field operations.  It
   computes 1D projections of a 2D grid along selected directions.
   Given enough projections, the original grid can be reconstructed
   exactly.

   The transform operates on unsigned integer elements using modular
   addition.  The element size is an implementation choice: 128-bit
   elements leverage SSE SIMD instructions; 64-bit elements are
   compatible with NEON and AVX2 vector widths.  No Galois field
   operations are required.

12.5.2.  Grid Structure

   Data is arranged as a P x Q grid of unsigned integer elements, where
   P is the number of columns and Q is the number of rows.  For k data
   shards of S bytes each with W-byte elements:

   P = S / W       (columns per row)
   Q = k           (rows = data shards)

12.5.3.  Directions

   A direction is a pair of coprime integers (p_i, q_i).
   Implementations SHOULD use q_i = 1 for all directions [PARREIN].  For
   n = k + m total shards, n directions are generated with non-zero p
   values symmetric around zero:

   *  For n = 4: p = {-2, -1, 1, 2}

   *  For n = 6: p = {-3, -2, -1, 1, 2, 3}

12.5.4.  Forward Transform (Encoding)

   For each direction (p_i, q_i), the forward transform computes a 1D
   projection.  Each bin sums the grid elements along a discrete line:

   Projection(b, p, q) = SUM over all (row, col) where
                          col * p - row * q + offset = b
                          of Grid[row][col]

   The number of bins B in a projection is:

   B(p, q, P, Q) = |p| * (Q - 1) + |q| * (P - 1) + 1

   For q = 1, this simplifies to:

   B = abs(p) * (Q - 1) + P

   The byte size of the projection is B * W.

12.5.5.  Katz Reconstruction Criterion

   Reconstruction is possible if and only if the Katz criterion [KATZ]
   holds:

   SUM(i=1..n) |q_i| >= Q    OR    SUM(i=1..n) |p_i| >= P

   When all q_i = 1, the q-sum simplifies to n >= Q.

12.5.6.  Inverse Transform (Decoding)

   The inverse uses the corner-peeling algorithm:

   1.  Count how many unknown elements contribute to each bin.

   2.  Find any bin with exactly one contributor (singleton).

   3.  Recover the element, subtract from all projections.

   4.  Repeat until all elements are recovered.

   The algorithm is O(n * P * Q).

12.5.7.  Systematic Mojette

   In the systematic form (FFV2_ENCODING_MOJETTE_SYSTEMATIC), the first
   k shards are the original data rows and the remaining m shards are
   projections.  Healthy reads require no decoding.

   Reconstruction of missing data rows:

   1.  Load available parity projections.

   2.  Subtract contributions of present data rows (residual).

   3.  Corner-peel the residual to recover missing rows.

   Reconstruction cost is O(m * k) — a fundamental advantage over RS at
   wide geometries (k >= 8).

12.5.8.  Non-Systematic Mojette

   In the non-systematic form (FFV2_ENCODING_MOJETTE_NON_SYSTEMATIC),
   all k + m shards are projections.  Every read requires the full
   inverse transform.  This provides constant performance regardless of
   failure count, but at higher baseline read cost than systematic.

12.5.9.  Mojette Shard Sizes

   Unlike RS, Mojette parity shard sizes vary by direction:

     +==================+=========================+==================+
     | Direction (p, q) | Bins (B) for P=512, Q=4 | Size (bytes,     |
     |                  |                         | 64-bit elements) |
     +==================+=========================+==================+
     | (-3, 1)          | 521                     | 4168             |
     +------------------+-------------------------+------------------+
     | (-2, 1)          | 518                     | 4144             |
     +------------------+-------------------------+------------------+
     | (-1, 1)          | 515                     | 4120             |
     +------------------+-------------------------+------------------+
     | (1, 1)           | 515                     | 4120             |
     +------------------+-------------------------+------------------+
     | (2, 1)           | 518                     | 4144             |
     +------------------+-------------------------+------------------+
     | (3, 1)           | 521                     | 4168             |
     +------------------+-------------------------+------------------+

       Table 3: Mojette projection sizes for 4+2, 4KB shards, 64-bit
                                  elements

   When using CHUNK operations, the chunk_size is a nominal stride; the
   last chunk in a parity shard MAY be shorter than the stride.

12.6.  Comparison of Encoding Types

      +================+==============+============+================+
      | Property       | Reed-Solomon | Mojette    | Mojette Non-   |
      |                |              | Systematic | Systematic     |
      +================+==============+============+================+
      | MDS guarantee  | Yes          | Yes (Katz) | Yes (Katz)     |
      +----------------+--------------+------------+----------------+
      | Shard sizes    | Uniform      | Variable   | Variable       |
      +----------------+--------------+------------+----------------+
      | Reconstruction | O(k^2)       | O(m * k)   | O(m * k)       |
      | cost           |              |            |                |
      +----------------+--------------+------------+----------------+
      | Healthy read   | Zero         | Zero       | Full decode    |
      | cost           |              |            |                |
      +----------------+--------------+------------+----------------+
      | GF operations  | Yes          | No         | No             |
      |                | (GF(2^8))    |            |                |
      +----------------+--------------+------------+----------------+
      | Recommended k  | k <= 6       | k >= 4     | Archive only   |
      +----------------+--------------+------------+----------------+

               Table 4: Comparison of erasure encoding types

   At small k (k <= 6), RS is the conservative choice with uniform shard
   sizes.  At wider geometries (k >= 8), systematic Mojette offers lower
   reconstruction cost.  Non-systematic Mojette is suitable only for
   archive workloads where reads are infrequent.

12.7.  First-Line Substitution to a Spare

   When a client's CHUNK_WRITE to an FFV2_DS_FLAGS_ACTIVE data server
   fails with a transport-level error, NFS4ERR_IO, NFS4ERR_NOSPC, or any
   other code that indicates the data server cannot accept the shard,
   and the layout includes a data server flagged FFV2_DS_FLAGS_SPARE
   (Section 9.4) that is not already holding a shard for the affected
   payload, the client MAY substitute the spare for the failing active
   data server for this write.

   Substitution avoids the full metadata-server repair flow.  The client
   issues CHUNK_WRITE to the spare in place of the failing ACTIVE and,
   if successful, proceeds with CHUNK_FINALIZE and CHUNK_COMMIT against
   the full set of data servers the payload now resides on (the k-1
   healthy ACTIVE plus the substituted SPARE).  The spare becomes the
   i-th shard holder for the affected payload.

   The client MUST inform the metadata server of the substitution before
   returning the layout.  This is done via LAYOUTERROR on the failing
   ACTIVE (reporting the error code the client encountered) in the same
   compound as, or before, any LAYOUTSTATS reporting of the
   substitution.  The metadata server uses the LAYOUTERROR to decide
   whether to update the layout in place -- promoting the spare to
   ACTIVE and demoting the failing ACTIVE to a stale-or-unreachable
   state -- or to push new layouts via CB_RECALL_ANY to other clients so
   readers do not continue to consult the failing ACTIVE.

   Substitution is optional.  A client that does not implement it, or
   does not have a suitable spare in the layout, falls through to the
   normal write-hole handling below.  Substitution is also not available
   to clients writing with cwa_stable == FILE_SYNC unless the client is
   prepared to drive FILE_SYNC semantics on the spare as well; otherwise
   the substitution silently downgrades the durability contract.

   Substitution MUST NOT be used when the existing PENDING state on any
   shard of the affected payload carries a different chunk_guard4 than
   the current transaction (the range has been adopted by a repair
   client already -- the normal repair flow applies and substitution
   would collide).

12.8.  Handling write holes

   A write hole occurs when a client begins writing a stripe but does
   not successfully write all k+m shards before a failure.  Some data
   servers will hold new data while others still hold old data,
   producing an inconsistent payload.

   The CHUNK_WRITE / CHUNK_ROLLBACK mechanism addresses this.  When a
   client issues CHUNK_WRITE, the data server retains a copy of the
   previous shard and places the new data in the PENDING state.  If any
   shard write fails, the client issues CHUNK_ROLLBACK to each data
   server that received a CHUNK_WRITE, restoring the previous content.
   The payload remains consistent from the reader's perspective
   throughout, because PENDING blocks carry the new chunk_guard4 value
   and CHUNK_READ returns the last COMMITTED or FINALIZED block when a
   PENDING block exists.

   A single-shard CHUNK_WRITE failure MAY also be handled without
   CHUNK_ROLLBACK by substituting the failing data server with an
   FFV2_DS_FLAGS_SPARE, per Section 12.7.  This avoids engaging the
   metadata server's repair flow and is the preferred path on transient
   single-DS failures when the layout exposes a suitable spare.

   In the multiple writer model, a write hole can also arise when two
   clients are racing.  The chunk_guard4 value on each shard identifies
   which transaction wrote it.  A reader that finds shards with
   different guard values detects the inconsistency and either retries
   (if a concurrent write is still in progress) or reports
   NFS4ERR_PAYLOAD_NOT_CONSISTENT to the metadata server to trigger
   repair.

   When substitution and CHUNK_ROLLBACK are both unavailable, and the
   payload cannot be reconstructed because too many shards have been
   lost (for example, a catastrophic multi-DS failure with no spares
   provisioned), the repair flow ultimately terminates with
   NFS4ERR_PAYLOAD_LOST; see Section 22.1.5.

13.  System Model and Correctness

   The design decisions in this document -- centralized coordination
   through the metadata server, CAS semantics via chunk_guard4,
   pessimistic lock escrow during repair, and erasure-coded reads from
   any sufficient subset -- depart visibly from a classical distributed-
   consensus protocol such as Paxos or Raft.  This section states the
   system model those decisions rest on, the consistency and progress
   guarantees the protocol provides under that model, and how the
   protocol relates to (and when it relies on) classical consensus.  It
   is intended as the correctness framing for implementers and
   reviewers; the normative wire behavior is defined in the preceding
   sections.

13.1.  Actors and Roles

   Three actors participate on behalf of any given file:

   pNFS client:  Issues CHUNK operations to data servers over the data
      path; issues LAYOUTGET, LAYOUTRETURN, LAYOUTERROR, and SEQUENCE to
      the metadata server on the control path.  Authenticates to the
      metadata server via AUTH_SYS, RPCSEC_GSS, or TLS.  MAY be selected
      as a repair client via CB_CHUNK_REPAIR.

   Metadata server (MDS):  Is the sole coordinator for the file.
      Grants, renews, and revokes layouts; issues TRUST_STATEID /
      REVOKE_STATEID / BULK_REVOKE_STATEID to each tight-coupled data
      server; selects the repair client under the rules in
      Section 12.2.4; owns the reserved CHUNK_GUARD_CLIENT_ID_MDS escrow
      identity for in-flight repair.

   Data server (DS):  Persists chunks and enforces the per-file trust
      table, the per-chunk guard CAS (chunk_guard4), the per-chunk lock
      state (including the MDS-escrow owner), and the chunk state
      machine (EMPTY / PENDING / FINALIZED / COMMITTED).  Has no
      coordinator role.  Has no knowledge of the erasure coding type in
      use for any file: the erasure transform is performed entirely at
      the client, and the data server stores the resulting chunks
      without interpreting their contents.

   The protocol does NOT mandate how a data server implements the chunk
   state machine or stores PENDING chunks.  An implementation MAY use
   per-client staging files, a single append-only instance file with an
   index, a separate metadata-header file paired with a blocks file, a
   log-structured store, or any other representation that preserves the
   normative semantics (the EMPTY / PENDING / FINALIZED / COMMITTED
   transitions, the chunk_guard4 CAS, lock continuity across revocation,
   and the integrity checks).  The choice is a data-server
   implementation concern and is transparent to clients and the metadata
   server.

   Each file is owned by exactly one metadata server at any given
   instant.  Ownership transfer between metadata servers (for example,
   during MDS failover) is implementation-defined and out of scope for
   this document; see Section 13.5.

13.2.  Failure Model

   The protocol assumes:

   Crash-stop:  Clients, metadata servers, and data servers fail by
      stopping.  A restarted component rejoins the protocol with a fresh
      epoch and participates in the grace / reclaim path already defined
      in [RFC8881].  Correct components do not exhibit arbitrary
      (Byzantine) behavior.

   Fail-silent data servers:  Data servers report honestly about the
      state of the data they hold.  The protocol detects on-disk bit rot
      via CRC32 (see Section 26.10) but does not defend against a data
      server that deliberately lies about whether a chunk is COMMITTED
      or what its contents are.  Byzantine data servers are explicitly
      outside the trust model; see Section 13.6.

   Authenticated writers and their own data:  An authenticated client
      may write arbitrary (even semantically-invalid) bytes into chunks
      it owns.  The CRC32 check detects transport corruption, not
      adversarial content.  This matches the existing NFSv4
      authorization model: once you have write access, you may write
      anything.

   Network partitions:  The protocol is partition-tolerant at the cost
      of availability during the partition window.  A client partitioned
      from a data server recovers via LAYOUTERROR and may be issued a
      new layout (possibly against a spare, see Section 12.7).  An MDS
      partitioned from a data server eventually renews trust entries on
      reconnection; in the interim, the data server returns
      NFS4ERR_DELAY for affected stateids (see Section 6.4.8).  Message
      loss is bounded by RPC retransmit; eventual delivery is assumed
      once the partition heals.

   Lease bound:  All state held by a data server on behalf of a metadata
      server is bounded by the TRUST_STATEID expiry (see Section 6.4.6).
      An orphaned entry will eventually expire even if the metadata
      server never returns.

13.3.  Consistency Guarantees

   The protocol provides *per-chunk linearizability on COMMITTED state*:

   1.  Once CHUNK_COMMIT returns success to a writer for a given chunk,
       every subsequent CHUNK_READ whose stateid postdates the COMMIT
       observes either that writer's data or the data of a later
       committed write.  A reader MUST NOT observe a rolled-back write
       as if it had committed.

   2.  Concurrent writers on the same chunk in multi-writer mode
       serialize via chunk_guard4.  On guard conflict one writer
       succeeds; the other receives NFS4ERR_CHUNK_GUARDED and MUST
       either abandon the write or re-read and retry.  At most one
       generation becomes COMMITTED per serialized decision.

   3.  During repair, the chunk's lock is held continuously -- first by
       the original writer, then transferred to the MDS-escrow owner on
       REVOKE_STATEID, and finally adopted by the repair client via
       CHUNK_LOCK_FLAGS_ADOPT.  No writer that did not hold the lock may
       observe or mutate the chunk.  The invariant "a chunk with a live
       lock has exactly one logical owner at any instant" is preserved
       across revocation.

   Across multiple chunks the protocol makes *no multi-chunk atomicity
   or ordering guarantee*.  A reader that reads chunk A at one offset
   and chunk B at another MAY observe A's new value and B's old value
   simultaneously.  Applications that require multi-chunk atomicity must
   layer it above this protocol -- for example, via file-level
   checksums, application-level generation fields, or external
   transaction managers.

   Erasure-coded reads:  A reader of an erasure-coded file reconstructs
      the plaintext from any sufficient subset of k shards of the (k+m)-
      shard stripe; the guard values on those shards MUST agree.  Shards
      with stale guards are ignored.  This is not a quorum read in the
      Paxos sense -- there is no voting on a value; there is only
      reconstruction of the single value identified by the current
      guard.

   Rollback invariant:  The data server MUST retain the prior FINALIZED
      or COMMITTED content of a chunk while any successor PENDING chunk
      exists.  A corollary of this rule is the *lowest-guard-
      recoverable* property: as long as at least k data servers in the
      mirror set retain the chunk at some generation G or lower, the
      payload that was COMMITTED at generation G (or earlier) can be
      reconstructed.  This is the correctness basis for CHUNK_ROLLBACK
      (see Section 26.8): rollback does not synthesize data, it simply
      selects the lowest-generation chunks whose guards agree across the
      mirror set and discards the higher-generation PENDING or FINALIZED
      chunks that triggered the rollback.  The protocol never relies on
      locating or reconstructing data from outside the mirror set.

13.4.  Progress and Termination

   Under the failure model above, the protocol guarantees the following
   progress properties:

   Data-path progress:  If all mirrors are reachable and none are
      failed, a CHUNK_WRITE followed by CHUNK_FINALIZE followed by
      CHUNK_COMMIT completes in O(1) round trips independent of cluster
      size.  In particular, there is no consensus round, no leader
      election, and no quorum voting on the write itself.  The three
      operations MAY be amortized across compounds: a steady-state
      writer sending a series of CHUNK_WRITEs can piggyback the
      CHUNK_FINALIZE of the previous write on the compound that carries
      the next write (for example, SEQUENCE + PUTFH + CHUNK_FINALIZE +
      CHUNK_WRITE), reducing the data-path happy case to a single round
      trip per CHUNK_WRITE rather than three.  The CHUNK_COMMIT for the
      final write in a sequence MAY similarly ride on the CLOSE
      compound.  These compound-packing optimizations are permitted by
      the normal NFSv4.2 compound rules and require no protocol
      extensions.

   Repair termination:  Every CB_CHUNK_REPAIR completes in bounded time.
      The client selected as the repair client either:

      1.  returns NFS4_OK for every range in ccra_ranges (repair
          succeeded), or

      2.  returns NFS4ERR_PAYLOAD_LOST for one or more ranges (the
          erasure code lost too many shards to reconstruct; the data is
          permanently unrecoverable), or

      3.  fails to respond within the ccra_deadline, in which case the
          metadata server MUST re-select under the rules in
          Section 12.2.4 or MUST declare the ranges lost.

      NFS4ERR_PAYLOAD_LOST is terminal for the affected ranges.  The
      protocol makes no further attempt to recover them.

   Eventual trust-table convergence:  After a metadata server restart,
      each data server's trust table converges to the metadata server's
      view within one metadata-server lease period.  Entries that the
      metadata server does not re-issue expire naturally via tsa_expire;
      entries that the metadata server does re-issue transition from
      pending-revalidation back to active on the next TRUST_STATEID (see
      Section 6.4.8).

   The protocol does NOT guarantee progress if the metadata server is
   unavailable for longer than its lease period -- this is the standard
   NFSv4 lease assumption and is inherited unchanged.

13.5.  Relation to Classical Consensus

   Classical consensus protocols (Paxos, Raft, Viewstamped Replication)
   solve the problem of reaching agreement among mutually-distrusting
   replicas in the absence of a trusted coordinator.  They typically
   cost two or three round trips per decision, require a majority of
   replicas to be live and reachable for progress, and impose the
   overhead of leader election and log replication.

   This protocol is not a consensus protocol and does not attempt to be.
   Its approach instead is:

   1.  *Designated coordinator.* The metadata server is the coordinator
       for a file.  Clients accept the MDS's authority for layout
       grants, stateid registration, repair client selection, and
       revocation.  This assumption is the same one made by [RFC8434]
       and all pNFS layout types to date.

   2.  *Per-chunk CAS, not per-chunk voting.* Concurrent writes on the
       same chunk serialize via chunk_guard4 as a CAS primitive (see
       Section 25.1).  No replica vote is required; the data server that
       owns the chunk evaluates the guard locally and rejects stale
       writes with NFS4ERR_CHUNK_GUARDED.

   3.  *Pessimistic locks off the critical path.* CHUNK_LOCK is used
       only during repair, never on the normal write path.  Lock escrow
       (see Section 25.1.1) preserves the "exactly one owner" invariant
       across stateid revocation without requiring a consensus round to
       elect the next owner.

   4.  *Erasure-coded reads replace quorum reads.* A reader reconstructs
       from any k of k+m shards with matching guards.  No voting is
       needed because there is no disagreement to resolve: the guard
       identifies the single generation that was committed.

   The result is a data path with O(1) round-trip cost independent of
   the number of replicas, and a repair path whose cost is bounded by
   the number of affected chunks rather than by the cluster size.

   Metadata-server high availability is orthogonal.  Deployments that
   require a highly-available metadata server MAY replicate metadata-
   server state across multiple metadata server instances using
   classical consensus (Raft, Paxos, or equivalent).  Such replication
   is implementation-defined; from a pNFS client's perspective a highly-
   available metadata server looks like a single metadata server that
   occasionally resets its session and triggers grace-period reclaim,
   and the client's behavior is already specified by [RFC8881].  This
   protocol neither requires nor precludes such an implementation.

13.6.  Non-Goals

   For clarity, the protocol explicitly does not provide:

   *  *Byzantine fault tolerance.* A data server that deliberately
      misreports its state, or a client that bypasses its own
      authentication, is outside the trust model.  Deployments requiring
      Byzantine tolerance must add it in a layer above or below this
      protocol.

   *  *Metadata server high availability.* Single-MDS-per-file is the
      protocol model.  MDS HA, if deployed, is implemented below the
      wire protocol and transparent to clients.

   *  *Cross-file atomicity.* Writes to multiple files are not atomic at
      the protocol level.  File-system-level transactions are not
      defined.

   *  *Multi-chunk atomicity within a single file.* COMMITs on distinct
      chunks are independent.  A reader may observe a partial write
      across chunks; applications must layer their own consistency if
      they need otherwise.

   *  *Global linearizability across unrelated files.* Each file's
      COMMITTED state is linearizable in isolation; no total order is
      defined across files.

   *  *Authenticated malicious client protection.* An authenticated
      client may write garbage into its own chunks with a correctly
      computed CRC32; see Section 28.1.  The CRC32 check is a transport-
      integrity check, not an adversarial-integrity check.

14.  NFSv4.2 Operations Allowed to Data Files


   // In Flexible File Version 1 Layout Type, the emphasis was on NFSv3
   // DSes.  We limited the operations that clients could send to data
   // files to be COMMIT, READ, and WRITE.  We further limited the MDS
   // to GETATTR, SETATTR, CREATE, and REMOVE.  (Funny enough, this is
   // not mandated here.)  We need to call this out in this draft and
   // also we need to limit the NFSv4.2 operations.  Besides the ones
   // created here, consider: READ, WRITE, and COMMIT for mirroring
   // types and ALLOCATE, CLONE, COPY, DEALLOCATE, GETFH, PUTFH,
   // READ_PLUS, RESTOREFH, SAVEFH, SEEK, and SEQUENCE for all types.
   //
   // -- Tom


   // Of special merit is SETATTR.  Do we want to allow the clients to
   // be able to truncate the data files?  Which also brings up
   // DEALLOCATE.  Perhaps we want CHUNK_DEALLOCATE?  That way we can
   // swap out chunks with the client file.  CHUNK_DEALLOCATE_GUARD.
   // Really need to determine capabilities of XFS swap!
   //
   // -- Tom

15.  Flexible File Layout Type Return

   layoutreturn_file4 is used in the LAYOUTRETURN operation to convey
   layout-type-specific information to the server.  It is defined in
   Section 18.44.1 of [RFC8881] (also shown in Figure 33).

         /* Constants used for LAYOUTRETURN and CB_LAYOUTRECALL */
         const LAYOUT4_RET_REC_FILE      = 1;
         const LAYOUT4_RET_REC_FSID      = 2;
         const LAYOUT4_RET_REC_ALL       = 3;

         enum layoutreturn_type4 {
                 LAYOUTRETURN4_FILE = LAYOUT4_RET_REC_FILE,
                 LAYOUTRETURN4_FSID = LAYOUT4_RET_REC_FSID,
                 LAYOUTRETURN4_ALL  = LAYOUT4_RET_REC_ALL
         };

      struct layoutreturn_file4 {
              offset4         lrf_offset;
              length4         lrf_length;
              stateid4        lrf_stateid;
              /* layouttype4 specific data */
              opaque          lrf_body<>;
      };

      union layoutreturn4 switch(layoutreturn_type4 lr_returntype) {
              case LAYOUTRETURN4_FILE:
                      layoutreturn_file4      lr_layout;
              default:
                      void;
      };

      struct LAYOUTRETURN4args {
              /* CURRENT_FH: file */
              bool                    lora_reclaim;
              layouttype4             lora_layout_type;
              layoutiomode4           lora_iomode;
              layoutreturn4           lora_layoutreturn;
      };

                        Figure 33: Layout Return XDR

   If the lora_layout_type layout type is LAYOUT4_FLEX_FILES and the
   lr_returntype is LAYOUTRETURN4_FILE, then the lrf_body opaque value
   is defined by ff_layoutreturn4 (see Section 15.3).  This allows the
   client to report I/O error information or layout usage statistics
   back to the metadata server as defined below.  Note that while the
   data structures are built on concepts introduced in NFSv4.2, the
   effective discriminated union (lora_layout_type combined with
   ff_layoutreturn4) allows for an NFSv4.1 metadata server to utilize
   the data.

15.1.  I/O Error Reporting

15.1.1.  ff_ioerr4

      /// struct ffv2_ioerr4 {
      ///         offset4        ffie_offset;
      ///         length4        ffie_length;
      ///         stateid4       ffie_stateid;
      ///         device_error4  ffie_errors<>;
      /// };
      ///

                            Figure 34: ff_ioerr4

   Recall that [RFC7862] defines device_error4 as in Figure 35:

      struct device_error4 {
              deviceid4       de_deviceid;
              nfsstat4        de_status;
              nfs_opnum4      de_opnum;
      };

                          Figure 35: device_error4

   The ff_ioerr4 structure is used to return error indications for data
   files that generated errors during data transfers.  These are hints
   to the metadata server that there are problems with that file.  For
   each error, ffie_errors.de_deviceid, ffie_offset, and ffie_length
   represent the storage device and byte range within the file in which
   the error occurred; ffie_errors represents the operation and type of
   error.  The use of device_error4 is described in Section 15.6 of
   [RFC7862].

   Even though the storage device might be accessed via NFSv3 and
   reports back NFSv3 errors to the client, the client is responsible
   for mapping these to appropriate NFSv4 status codes as de_status.
   Likewise, the NFSv3 operations need to be mapped to equivalent NFSv4
   operations.

15.2.  Layout Usage Statistics

15.2.1.  ff_io_latency4

      /// struct ffv2_io_latency4 {
      ///         uint64_t       ffil_ops_requested;
      ///         uint64_t       ffil_bytes_requested;
      ///         uint64_t       ffil_ops_completed;
      ///         uint64_t       ffil_bytes_completed;
      ///         uint64_t       ffil_bytes_not_delivered;
      ///         nfstime4       ffil_total_busy_time;
      ///         nfstime4       ffil_aggregate_completion_time;
      /// };
      ///

                         Figure 36: ff_io_latency4

   Both operation counts and bytes transferred are kept in the
   ff_io_latency4 (see Figure 36.  As seen in ff_layoutupdate4 (see
   Section 15.2.2), READ and WRITE operations are aggregated separately.
   READ operations are used for the ff_io_latency4 ffl_read.  Both WRITE
   and COMMIT operations are used for the ff_io_latency4 ffl_write.
   "Requested" counters track what the client is attempting to do, and
   "completed" counters track what was done.  There is no requirement
   that the client only report completed results that have matching
   requested results from the reported period.

   ffil_bytes_not_delivered is used to track the aggregate number of
   bytes requested but not fulfilled due to error conditions.
   ffil_total_busy_time is the aggregate time spent with outstanding RPC
   calls. ffil_aggregate_completion_time is the sum of all round-trip
   times for completed RPC calls.

   In Section 3.3.1 of [RFC8881], the nfstime4 is defined as the number
   of seconds and nanoseconds since midnight or zero hour January 1,
   1970 Coordinated Universal Time (UTC).  The use of nfstime4 in
   ff_io_latency4 is to store time since the start of the first I/O from
   the client after receiving the layout.  In other words, these are to
   be decoded as duration and not as a date and time.

   Note that LAYOUTSTATS are cumulative, i.e., not reset each time the
   operation is sent.  If two LAYOUTSTATS operations for the same file
   and layout stateid originate from the same NFS client and are
   processed at the same time by the metadata server, then the one
   containing the larger values contains the most recent time series
   data.

15.2.2.  ff_layoutupdate4

      /// struct ffv2_layoutupdate4 {
      ///         netaddr4         ffl_addr;
      ///         nfs_fh4          ffl_fhandle;
      ///         ffv2_io_latency4 ffl_read;
      ///         ffv2_io_latency4 ffl_write;
      ///         nfstime4         ffl_duration;
      ///         bool             ffl_local;
      /// };
      ///

                        Figure 37: ff_layoutupdate4

   ffl_addr differentiates which network address the client is connected
   to on the storage device.  In the case of multipathing, ffl_fhandle
   indicates which read-only copy was selected. ffl_read and ffl_write
   convey the latencies for both READ and WRITE operations,
   respectively. ffl_duration is used to indicate the time period over
   which the statistics were collected.  If true, ffl_local indicates
   that the I/O was serviced by the client's cache.  This flag allows
   the client to inform the metadata server about "hot" access to a file
   it would not normally be allowed to report on.

15.2.3.  ff_iostats4

      /// struct ffv2_iostats4 {
      ///         offset4            ffis_offset;
      ///         length4            ffis_length;
      ///         stateid4           ffis_stateid;
      ///         io_info4           ffis_read;
      ///         io_info4           ffis_write;
      ///         deviceid4          ffis_deviceid;
      ///         ffv2_layoutupdate4 ffis_layoutupdate;
      /// };
      ///

                           Figure 38: ff_iostats4

   [RFC7862] defines io_info4 as in Figure 38.

      struct io_info4 {
              uint64_t        ii_count;
              uint64_t        ii_bytes;
      };

                            Figure 39: io_info4

   With pNFS, data transfers are performed directly between the pNFS
   client and the storage devices.  Therefore, the metadata server has
   no direct knowledge of the I/O operations being done and thus cannot
   create on its own statistical information about client I/O to
   optimize the data storage location.  ff_iostats4 MAY be used by the
   client to report I/O statistics back to the metadata server upon
   returning the layout.

   Since it is not feasible for the client to report every I/O that used
   the layout, the client MAY identify "hot" byte ranges for which to
   report I/O statistics.  The definition and/or configuration mechanism
   of what is considered "hot" and the size of the reported byte range
   are out of the scope of this document.  For client implementation,
   providing reasonable default values and an optional run-time
   management interface to control these parameters is suggested.  For
   example, a client can define the default byte-range resolution to be
   1 MB in size and the thresholds for reporting to be 1 MB/second or 10
   I/O operations per second.

   For each byte range, ffis_offset and ffis_length represent the
   starting offset of the range and the range length in bytes.
   ffis_read.ii_count, ffis_read.ii_bytes, ffis_write.ii_count, and
   ffis_write.ii_bytes represent the number of contiguous READ and WRITE
   I/Os and the respective aggregate number of bytes transferred within
   the reported byte range.

   The combination of ffis_deviceid and ffl_addr uniquely identifies
   both the storage path and the network route to it.  Finally,
   ffl_fhandle allows the metadata server to differentiate between
   multiple read-only copies of the file on the same storage device.

15.3.  ff_layoutreturn4

      /// struct ffv2_layoutreturn4 {
      ///         ffv2_ioerr4     fflr_ioerr_report<>;
      ///         ffv2_iostats4   fflr_iostats_report<>;
      /// };
      ///

                        Figure 40: ff_layoutreturn4

   When data file I/O operations fail, fflr_ioerr_report<> is used to
   report these errors to the metadata server as an array of elements of
   type ff_ioerr4.  Each element in the array represents an error that
   occurred on the data file identified by ffie_errors.de_deviceid.  If
   no errors are to be reported, the size of the fflr_ioerr_report<>
   array is set to zero.  The client MAY also use fflr_iostats_report<>
   to report a list of I/O statistics as an array of elements of type
   ff_iostats4.  Each element in the array represents statistics for a
   particular byte range.  Byte ranges are not guaranteed to be disjoint
   and MAY repeat or intersect.

16.  Flexible File Layout Type LAYOUTERROR

   If the client is using NFSv4.2 to communicate with the metadata
   server, then instead of waiting for a LAYOUTRETURN to send error
   information to the metadata server (see Section 15.1), it MAY use
   LAYOUTERROR (see Section 15.6 of [RFC7862]) to communicate that
   information.  For the flexible file layout type, this means that
   LAYOUTERROR4args is treated the same as ff_ioerr4.

17.  Flexible File Layout Type LAYOUTSTATS

   If the client is using NFSv4.2 to communicate with the metadata
   server, then instead of waiting for a LAYOUTRETURN to send I/O
   statistics to the metadata server (see Section 15.2), it MAY use
   LAYOUTSTATS (see Section 15.7 of [RFC7862]) to communicate that
   information.  For the flexible file layout type, this means that
   LAYOUTSTATS4args.lsa_layoutupdate is overloaded with the same
   contents as in ffis_layoutupdate.

18.  Flexible File Layout Type Creation Hint

   The layouthint4 type is defined in the [RFC8881] as in Figure 41.

      struct layouthint4 {
          layouttype4        loh_type;
          opaque             loh_body<>;
      };

                         Figure 41: layouthint4 v1

                             {{fig-layouthint4-v1}}

   The layouthint4 structure is used by the client to pass a hint about
   the type of layout it would like created for a particular file.  If
   the loh_type layout type is LAYOUT4_FLEX_FILES, then the loh_body
   opaque value is defined by the ff_layouthint4 type.

19.  ff_layouthint4

      union ff_mirrors_hint switch (bool ffmc_valid) {
          case TRUE:
              uint32_t    ffmc_mirrors;
          case FALSE:
              void;
      };

      struct ff_layouthint4 {
          ff_mirrors_hint    fflh_mirrors_hint;
      };

                Figure 42: ff_layouthint4 (v1 compatibility)

   The ff_layouthint4 is retained for backwards compatibility with Flex
   Files v1 layouts.  For Flex Files v2 layouts, clients SHOULD use
   ffv2_layouthint4 (Figure 22) instead, which provides coding type
   selection and data protection geometry hints via
   ffv2_data_protection4 (Figure 21).

20.  Recalling a Layout

   While Section 12.5.5 of [RFC8881] discusses reasons independent of
   layout type for recalling a layout, the flexible file layout type
   metadata server should recall outstanding layouts in the following
   cases:

   *  When the file's security policy changes, i.e., ACLs or permission
      mode bits are set.

   *  When the file's layout changes, rendering outstanding layouts
      invalid.

   *  When existing layouts are inconsistent with the need to enforce
      locking constraints.

   *  When existing layouts are inconsistent with the requirements
      regarding resilvering as described in Section 12.1.3.

20.1.  CB_RECALL_ANY

   The metadata server can use the CB_RECALL_ANY callback operation to
   notify the client to return some or all of its layouts.  Section 22.3
   of [RFC8881] defines the allowed types of the "NFSv4 Recallable
   Object Types Registry".

      /// const RCA4_TYPE_MASK_FF2_LAYOUT_MIN     = 20;
      /// const RCA4_TYPE_MASK_FF2_LAYOUT_MAX     = 21;
      ///

                        Figure 43: RCA4 masks for v2

      struct  CB_RECALL_ANY4args      {
          uint32_t        craa_layouts_to_keep;
          bitmap4         craa_type_mask;
      };

                     Figure 44: CB_RECALL_ANY4args XDR

   Typically, CB_RECALL_ANY will be used to recall client state when the
   server needs to reclaim resources.  The craa_type_mask bitmap
   specifies the type of resources that are recalled, and the
   craa_layouts_to_keep value specifies how many of the recalled
   flexible file layouts the client is allowed to keep.  The mask flags
   for the flexible file layout type are defined as in Figure 45.

      /// enum ffv2_cb_recall_any_mask {
      ///     PNFS_FF_RCA4_TYPE_MASK_READ = 20,
      ///     PNFS_FF_RCA4_TYPE_MASK_RW   = 21
      /// };
      ///

                    Figure 45: Recall Mask Flags for v2

   The flags represent the iomode of the recalled layouts.  In response,
   the client SHOULD return layouts of the recalled iomode that it needs
   the least, keeping at most craa_layouts_to_keep flexible file
   layouts.

   The PNFS_FF_RCA4_TYPE_MASK_READ flag notifies the client to return
   layouts of iomode LAYOUTIOMODE4_READ.  Similarly, the
   PNFS_FF_RCA4_TYPE_MASK_RW flag notifies the client to return layouts
   of iomode LAYOUTIOMODE4_RW.  When both mask flags are set, the client
   is notified to return layouts of either iomode.

21.  Client Fencing

   In cases where clients are uncommunicative and their lease has
   expired or when clients fail to return recalled layouts within a
   lease period, the server MAY revoke client layouts and reassign these
   resources to other clients (see Section 12.5.5 of [RFC8881]).  To
   avoid data corruption, the metadata server MUST fence off the revoked
   clients from the respective data files as described in Section 6.2.

22.  New NFSv4.2 Error Values

      ///
      /// /* Erasure Coding error constants; added to nfsstat4 enum */
      ///
      /// const NFS4ERR_CODING_NOT_SUPPORTED   = 10097;
      /// const NFS4ERR_PAYLOAD_NOT_CONSISTENT = 10098;
      /// const NFS4ERR_CHUNK_LOCKED           = 10099;
      /// const NFS4ERR_CHUNK_GUARDED          = 10100;
      /// const NFS4ERR_PAYLOAD_LOST           = 10101;
      ///

                           Figure 46: Errors XDR

   The new error codes are shown in Figure 46.

22.1.  Error Definitions

       +================================+========+================+
       | Error                          | Number | Description    |
       +================================+========+================+
       | NFS4ERR_CODING_NOT_SUPPORTED   | 10097  | Section 22.1.1 |
       +--------------------------------+--------+----------------+
       | NFS4ERR_PAYLOAD_NOT_CONSISTENT | 10098  | Section 22.1.2 |
       +--------------------------------+--------+----------------+
       | NFS4ERR_CHUNK_LOCKED           | 10099  | Section 22.1.3 |
       +--------------------------------+--------+----------------+
       | NFS4ERR_CHUNK_GUARDED          | 10100  | Section 22.1.4 |
       +--------------------------------+--------+----------------+
       | NFS4ERR_PAYLOAD_LOST           | 10101  | Section 22.1.5 |
       +--------------------------------+--------+----------------+

                                Table 5: X

22.1.1.  NFS4ERR_CODING_NOT_SUPPORTED (Error Code 10097)

   The client requested a ffv2_coding_type4 which the metadata server
   does not support.  I.e., if the client sends a layout_hint requesting
   an erasure coding type that the metadata server does not support,
   this error code can be returned.  The client might have to send the
   layout_hint several times to determine the overlapping set of
   supported erasure coding types.

22.1.2.  NFS4ERR_PAYLOAD_NOT_CONSISTENT (Error Code 10098)

   The client encountered a payload in which the blocks were
   inconsistent and stays inconsistent.  As the client can not tell if
   another client is actively writing, it informs the metadata server of
   this error via LAYOUTERROR.  The metadata server can then arrange for
   repair of the file.

22.1.3.  NFS4ERR_CHUNK_LOCKED (Error Code 10099)

   The client tried an operation on a chunk which resulted in the data
   server reporting that the chunk was locked.  The client will then
   inform the metadata server of this error via LAYOUTERROR.  The
   metadata server can then arrange for repair of the file.

22.1.4.  NFS4ERR_CHUNK_GUARDED (Error Code 10100)

   The client tried a guarded CHUNK_WRITE on a chunk which did not match
   the guard on the chunk in the data file.  As such, the CHUNK_WRITE
   was rejected and the client should refresh the chunk it has cached.

22.1.5.  NFS4ERR_PAYLOAD_LOST (Error Code 10101)

   Returned by a repair client on the CB_CHUNK_REPAIR response
   (ccrr_status) to indicate that the identified ranges cannot be
   repaired and the underlying data is no longer recoverable.  Causes
   include: too few surviving shards to meet the reconstruction
   threshold (Katz criterion for Mojette, any k-of-(k+m) subset for
   Reed-Solomon Vandermonde), inability to roll back to a previously
   committed payload because that payload is also lost, or exhaustion of
   all FFV2_DS_FLAGS_SPARE and FFV2_DS_FLAGS_REPAIR data servers
   available in the layout.

   On receipt, the metadata server MUST NOT retry the repair by
   selecting a different client -- the payload is damaged and the
   metadata server transitions the affected file or byte range into an
   implementation-defined damaged state.  Operator notification and
   restore-from-snapshot are out of scope for this specification.

   NFS4ERR_PAYLOAD_LOST is distinct from NFS4ERR_DELAY (transient;
   metadata server MAY extend the deadline or re-select) and from
   NFS4ERR_IO (per-operation failure; metadata server MAY retry or re-
   select).  Only NFS4ERR_PAYLOAD_LOST is terminal.


   // This really points out either we need an array of errors in the
   // chunk operation responses or we need to not send an array of
   // chunks in the requests.  The arrays were picked in order to reduce
   // the header to data cost, but really do not make sense.
   //
   // -- Tom


   // Trying out an array of errors.
   //
   // -- Tom

22.2.  Operations and Their Valid Errors

   The operations and their valid errors are presented in Table 6.  All
   error codes not defined in this document are defined in Section 15 of
   [RFC8881] and Section 11 of [RFC7862].

    +=====================+==========================================+
    | Operation           | Errors                                   |
    +=====================+==========================================+
    | CHUNK_COMMIT        | NFS4_OK, NFS4ERR_ACCESS, NFS4ERR_BADXDR, |
    |                     | NFS4ERR_DELAY, NFS4ERR_FHEXPIRED,        |
    |                     | NFS4ERR_INVAL, NFS4ERR_IO,               |
    |                     | NFS4ERR_NOTSUPP, NFS4ERR_SERVERFAULT,    |
    |                     | NFS4ERR_STALE                            |
    +---------------------+------------------------------------------+
    | CHUNK_ERROR         | NFS4_OK, NFS4ERR_ACCESS, NFS4ERR_BADXDR, |
    |                     | NFS4ERR_INVAL, NFS4ERR_NOTSUPP,          |
    |                     | NFS4ERR_SERVERFAULT                      |
    +---------------------+------------------------------------------+
    | CHUNK_FINALIZE      | NFS4_OK, NFS4ERR_ACCESS, NFS4ERR_BADXDR, |
    |                     | NFS4ERR_DELAY, NFS4ERR_FHEXPIRED,        |
    |                     | NFS4ERR_INVAL, NFS4ERR_IO,               |
    |                     | NFS4ERR_NOTSUPP, NFS4ERR_SERVERFAULT,    |
    |                     | NFS4ERR_STALE                            |
    +---------------------+------------------------------------------+
    | CHUNK_HEADER_READ   | NFS4_OK, NFS4ERR_ACCESS, NFS4ERR_BADXDR, |
    |                     | NFS4ERR_DELAY, NFS4ERR_FHEXPIRED,        |
    |                     | NFS4ERR_IO, NFS4ERR_NOTSUPP,             |
    |                     | NFS4ERR_SERVERFAULT, NFS4ERR_STALE       |
    +---------------------+------------------------------------------+
    | CHUNK_LOCK          | NFS4_OK, NFS4ERR_ACCESS, NFS4ERR_BADXDR, |
    |                     | NFS4ERR_CHUNK_LOCKED, NFS4ERR_INVAL,     |
    |                     | NFS4ERR_NOTSUPP, NFS4ERR_SERVERFAULT     |
    +---------------------+------------------------------------------+
    | CHUNK_READ          | NFS4_OK, NFS4ERR_ACCESS, NFS4ERR_BADXDR, |
    |                     | NFS4ERR_DELAY, NFS4ERR_FHEXPIRED,        |
    |                     | NFS4ERR_IO, NFS4ERR_NOTSUPP,             |
    |                     | NFS4ERR_PAYLOAD_NOT_CONSISTENT,          |
    |                     | NFS4ERR_SERVERFAULT, NFS4ERR_STALE       |
    +---------------------+------------------------------------------+
    | CHUNK_REPAIRED      | NFS4_OK, NFS4ERR_ACCESS, NFS4ERR_BADXDR, |
    |                     | NFS4ERR_INVAL, NFS4ERR_NOTSUPP,          |
    |                     | NFS4ERR_SERVERFAULT                      |
    +---------------------+------------------------------------------+
    | CHUNK_ROLLBACK      | NFS4_OK, NFS4ERR_ACCESS, NFS4ERR_BADXDR, |
    |                     | NFS4ERR_INVAL, NFS4ERR_NOTSUPP,          |
    |                     | NFS4ERR_SERVERFAULT                      |
    +---------------------+------------------------------------------+
    | CHUNK_UNLOCK        | NFS4_OK, NFS4ERR_ACCESS, NFS4ERR_BADXDR, |
    |                     | NFS4ERR_INVAL, NFS4ERR_NOTSUPP,          |
    |                     | NFS4ERR_SERVERFAULT                      |
    +---------------------+------------------------------------------+
    | CHUNK_WRITE         | NFS4_OK, NFS4ERR_ACCESS, NFS4ERR_BADXDR, |
    |                     | NFS4ERR_CHUNK_GUARDED,                   |
    |                     | NFS4ERR_CHUNK_LOCKED, NFS4ERR_DELAY,     |
    |                     | NFS4ERR_FHEXPIRED, NFS4ERR_IO,           |
    |                     | NFS4ERR_NOSPC, NFS4ERR_NOTSUPP,          |
    |                     | NFS4ERR_SERVERFAULT, NFS4ERR_STALE       |
    +---------------------+------------------------------------------+
    | CHUNK_WRITE_REPAIR  | NFS4_OK, NFS4ERR_ACCESS, NFS4ERR_BADXDR, |
    |                     | NFS4ERR_DELAY, NFS4ERR_FHEXPIRED,        |
    |                     | NFS4ERR_IO, NFS4ERR_NOSPC,               |
    |                     | NFS4ERR_NOTSUPP, NFS4ERR_SERVERFAULT,    |
    |                     | NFS4ERR_STALE                            |
    +---------------------+------------------------------------------+
    | TRUST_STATEID       | NFS4_OK, NFS4ERR_BADXDR,                 |
    |                     | NFS4ERR_BAD_STATEID, NFS4ERR_DELAY,      |
    |                     | NFS4ERR_INVAL, NFS4ERR_NOFILEHANDLE,     |
    |                     | NFS4ERR_NOTSUPP, NFS4ERR_PERM,           |
    |                     | NFS4ERR_SERVERFAULT                      |
    +---------------------+------------------------------------------+
    | REVOKE_STATEID      | NFS4_OK, NFS4ERR_BADXDR,                 |
    |                     | NFS4ERR_BAD_STATEID, NFS4ERR_DELAY,      |
    |                     | NFS4ERR_INVAL, NFS4ERR_NOFILEHANDLE,     |
    |                     | NFS4ERR_NOTSUPP, NFS4ERR_PERM,           |
    |                     | NFS4ERR_SERVERFAULT                      |
    +---------------------+------------------------------------------+
    | BULK_REVOKE_STATEID | NFS4_OK, NFS4ERR_BADXDR, NFS4ERR_DELAY,  |
    |                     | NFS4ERR_NOTSUPP, NFS4ERR_PERM,           |
    |                     | NFS4ERR_SERVERFAULT                      |
    +---------------------+------------------------------------------+

                Table 6: Operations and Their Valid Errors

22.3.  Callback Operations and Their Valid Errors

   The callback operations and their valid errors are presented in
   Table 7.  All error codes not defined in this document are defined in
   Section 15 of [RFC8881] and Section 11 of [RFC7862].

    +=================+==============================================+
    | Callback        | Errors                                       |
    | Operation       |                                              |
    +=================+==============================================+
    | CB_CHUNK_REPAIR | NFS4_OK, NFS4ERR_BADXDR,                     |
    |                 | NFS4ERR_BAD_STATEID, NFS4ERR_DEADSESSION,    |
    |                 | NFS4ERR_DELAY, NFS4ERR_CODING_NOT_SUPPORTED, |
    |                 | NFS4ERR_INVAL, NFS4ERR_IO, NFS4ERR_ISDIR,    |
    |                 | NFS4ERR_LOCKED, NFS4ERR_NOTSUPP,             |
    |                 | NFS4ERR_OLD_STATEID, NFS4ERR_PAYLOAD_LOST,   |
    |                 | NFS4ERR_SERVERFAULT, NFS4ERR_STALE           |
    +-----------------+----------------------------------------------+

           Table 7: Callback Operations and Their Valid Errors

22.4.  Errors and the Operations That Use Them

   The operations and their valid errors are presented in Table 8.  All
   operations not defined in this document are defined in Section 18 of
   [RFC8881] and Section 15 of [RFC7862].

       +==============================+============================+
       | Error                        | Operations                 |
       +==============================+============================+
       | NFS4ERR_CODING_NOT_SUPPORTED | CB_CHUNK_REPAIR, LAYOUTGET |
       +------------------------------+----------------------------+
       | NFS4ERR_PAYLOAD_LOST         | CB_CHUNK_REPAIR            |
       +------------------------------+----------------------------+

              Table 8: Errors and the Operations That Use Them

23.  EXCHGID4_FLAG_USE_PNFS_DS

      /// const EXCHGID4_FLAG_USE_ERASURE_DS      = 0x00100000;

                  Figure 47: The EXCHGID4_FLAG_USE_PNFS_DS

   When a data server connects to a metadata server it can via
   EXCHANGE_ID (see Section 18.35 of [RFC8881]) state its pNFS role.
   The data server can use EXCHGID4_FLAG_USE_ERASURE_DS (see Figure 47)
   to indicate that it supports the new NFSv4.2 operations introduced in
   this document.  Section 13.1 of [RFC8881] describes the interaction
   of the various pNFS roles masked by EXCHGID4_FLAG_MASK_PNFS.
   However, that does not mask out EXCHGID4_FLAG_USE_ERASURE_DS.  I.e.,
   EXCHGID4_FLAG_USE_ERASURE_DS can be used in combination with all of
   the pNFS flags.

   If the data server sets EXCHGID4_FLAG_USE_ERASURE_DS during the
   EXCHANGE_ID operation, then it MUST support all of the operations in
   Table 9.  Further, this support is orthogonal to the Erasure Coding
   Type selected.  The data server is unaware of which type is driving
   the I/O.

24.  New NFSv4.2 Attributes

24.1.  Attribute 89: fattr4_coding_block_size

      /// typedef uint64_t                  fattr4_coding_block_size;
      ///
      /// const FATTR4_CODING_BLOCK_SIZE  = 89;
      ///

                Figure 48: XDR for fattr4_coding_block_size

   The new attribute fattr4_coding_block_size (see Figure 48) is an
   OPTIONAL to NFSv4.2 attribute which MUST be supported if the metadata
   server supports the Flexible File Version 2 Layout Type.  By querying
   it, the client can determine the data block size it is to use when
   coding the data blocks to chunks.

25.  New NFSv4.2 Common Data Structures

25.1.  chunk_guard4

      /// const CHUNK_GUARD_CLIENT_ID_MDS  = 0xFFFFFFFF;
      ///
      /// struct chunk_guard4 {
      ///     uint32_t   cg_gen_id;
      ///     uint32_t   cg_client_id;
      /// };

                      Figure 49: XDR for chunk_guard4

   The chunk_guard4 (see Figure 49) is effectively a 64-bit value
   identifying a specific write transaction on a specific chunk.  It has
   two fields:

   cg_gen_id:  A per-chunk monotonic generation counter.  Each chunk's
      gen_id starts at 0 when the chunk is first written and is
      incremented on each successful write by any client.  cg_gen_id is
      NOT a timestamp -- the protocol does not rely on a global clock,
      and no interpretation of cg_gen_id as a wall-clock value is
      supported.  cg_gen_id values are NOT comparable across distinct
      chunks; a given cg_gen_id is only meaningful within the scope of a
      single chunk on a single file.

   cg_client_id:  A 32-bit value established by the metadata server at
      the time the client's layout is granted (see Section 9.8 and
      ffm_client_id).  The metadata server MUST assign distinct
      cg_client_id values to distinct clients that hold concurrent write
      layouts on the same file.  cg_client_id is opaque with respect to
      client identity -- a data server MUST NOT interpret its bits as
      naming or ordering clients in any external sense.  The value
      supports two operations only: equality comparison (to detect
      whether two chunks were written by the same transaction) and
      numeric comparison (to implement the tiebreaker rule below).

   Uniqueness contract:  The pair (cg_gen_id, cg_client_id) uniquely
      identifies a write transaction on a chunk.  Neither field alone is
      globally unique; two clients MAY independently write with the same
      cg_gen_id on the same chunk (in particular, both may write with
      cg_gen_id equal to some prior value + 1), and the cg_client_id is
      what makes the resulting transactions distinguishable.

   Deterministic tiebreaker for concurrent writers:  When two or more
      clients race on the same chunk in the multi-writer mode, the
      client whose cg_client_id compares numerically lowest wins the
      race.  A data server enforces this by accepting the first
      CHUNK_WRITE whose guard check succeeds and rejecting later writers
      with NFS4ERR_CHUNK_GUARDED; across the mirror set, the subset of
      data servers on which each client wins will vary, but the
      deterministic tiebreaker ensures all clients agree on which
      client's write ultimately becomes COMMITTED.  A client that lost
      the race on at least one data server MUST re-read the chunk and
      MAY retry its write with a refreshed cg_gen_id.  A client that
      detects no forward progress after a bounded number of retries MUST
      escalate via LAYOUTERROR and the repair coordination flow in
      Section 12.2.4.

   The numeric ordering of cg_client_id values is arbitrary with respect
   to the clients' external identities -- it is a deterministic total
   order over the opaque 32-bit values, not a preference ordering over
   the clients themselves.  A deployment that requires a specific client
   to win a race MUST arrange cg_client_id assignment at the metadata
   server; the protocol does not provide a preference mechanism at
   layout-grant time.

25.1.1.  Reserved cg_client_id Value: CHUNK_GUARD_CLIENT_ID_MDS

   The value CHUNK_GUARD_CLIENT_ID_MDS (0xFFFFFFFF) is reserved.  It
   denotes that the chunk lock is held by the metadata server itself, in
   escrow during a repair coordination sequence (see Section 12.2.4).
   The data server produces a chunk_guard4 with this cg_client_id when
   the metadata server revokes the prior holder's stateid while that
   holder still holds chunk locks; the locks MUST NOT be dropped and are
   transferred to the MDS-escrow owner instead.

   The metadata server does not originate CHUNK_LOCK or CHUNK_WRITE
   traffic on its own session.  Clients MUST NOT present
   CHUNK_GUARD_CLIENT_ID_MDS as the cg_client_id of any client-
   originated chunk_guard4 or chunk_owner4.  A data server that receives
   such a value from a client MUST reject the operation with
   NFS4ERR_INVAL.

   The MDS-escrow owner is released only by a CHUNK_LOCK from the client
   selected via CB_CHUNK_REPAIR, carrying CHUNK_LOCK_FLAGS_ADOPT.  See
   Section 26.5.

25.2.  chunk_owner4

      /// struct chunk_owner4 {
      ///     chunk_guard4   co_guard;
      ///     uint32_t       co_id;
      /// };

                      Figure 50: XDR for chunk_owner4

   The chunk_owner4 (see Figure 50) is used to determine when and by
   whom a block was written.  The co_id is used to identify the block
   and MUST be the index of the chunk within the file.  I.e., it is the
   offset of the start of the chunk divided by the chunk length.  The
   co_guard is a chunk_guard4 (see Section 25.1), used to identify a
   given transaction.

   The co_guard is like the change attribute (see Section 5.8.1.4 of
   [RFC8881]) in that each chunk write by a given client has to have an
   unique co_guard.  I.e., it can be determined which transaction across
   all data files that a chunk corresponds.

26.  New NFSv4.2 Operations

      ///
      /// /* New operations for Erasure Coding start here */
      ///
      ///  OP_CHUNK_COMMIT        = 77,
      ///  OP_CHUNK_ERROR         = 78,
      ///  OP_CHUNK_FINALIZE      = 79,
      ///  OP_CHUNK_HEADER_READ   = 80,
      ///  OP_CHUNK_LOCK          = 81,
      ///  OP_CHUNK_READ          = 82,
      ///  OP_CHUNK_REPAIRED      = 83,
      ///  OP_CHUNK_ROLLBACK      = 84,
      ///  OP_CHUNK_UNLOCK        = 85,
      ///  OP_CHUNK_WRITE         = 86,
      ///  OP_CHUNK_WRITE_REPAIR  = 87,
      ///
      /// /* MDS-to-DS control-plane operations for tight coupling */
      ///
      ///  OP_TRUST_STATEID       = 88,
      ///  OP_REVOKE_STATEID      = 89,
      ///  OP_BULK_REVOKE_STATEID = 90,
      ///

                         Figure 51: Operations XDR

   Operations 77 through 87 (the CHUNK_* operations) are sent by clients
   to storage devices on the data path.  Operations 88 through 90
   (TRUST_STATEID, REVOKE_STATEID, BULK_REVOKE_STATEID) are sent by the
   metadata server to storage devices on the MDS-to-DS control session
   (see Section 6.4.2); they MUST NOT be sent by pNFS clients.

    +=====================+========+==================+===============+
    | Operation           | Number | Target Server    | Description   |
    +=====================+========+==================+===============+
    | CHUNK_COMMIT        | 77     | DS (client)      | Section 26.1  |
    +---------------------+--------+------------------+---------------+
    | CHUNK_ERROR         | 78     | DS (client)      | Section 26.2  |
    +---------------------+--------+------------------+---------------+
    | CHUNK_FINALIZE      | 79     | DS (client)      | Section 26.3  |
    +---------------------+--------+------------------+---------------+
    | CHUNK_HEADER_READ   | 80     | DS (client)      | Section 26.4  |
    +---------------------+--------+------------------+---------------+
    | CHUNK_LOCK          | 81     | DS (client)      | Section 26.5  |
    +---------------------+--------+------------------+---------------+
    | CHUNK_READ          | 82     | DS (client)      | Section 26.6  |
    +---------------------+--------+------------------+---------------+
    | CHUNK_REPAIRED      | 83     | DS (client)      | Section 26.7  |
    +---------------------+--------+------------------+---------------+
    | CHUNK_ROLLBACK      | 84     | DS (client)      | Section 26.8  |
    +---------------------+--------+------------------+---------------+
    | CHUNK_UNLOCK        | 85     | DS (client)      | Section 26.9  |
    +---------------------+--------+------------------+---------------+
    | CHUNK_WRITE         | 86     | DS (client)      | Section 26.10 |
    +---------------------+--------+------------------+---------------+
    | CHUNK_WRITE_REPAIR  | 87     | DS (client)      | Section 26.11 |
    +---------------------+--------+------------------+---------------+
    | TRUST_STATEID       | 88     | DS (MDS control) | Section 26.12 |
    +---------------------+--------+------------------+---------------+
    | REVOKE_STATEID      | 89     | DS (MDS control) | Section 26.13 |
    +---------------------+--------+------------------+---------------+
    | BULK_REVOKE_STATEID | 90     | DS (MDS control) | Section 26.14 |
    +---------------------+--------+------------------+---------------+

                           Table 9: Protocol OPs

26.1.  Operation 77: CHUNK_COMMIT - Activate Cached Chunk Data

26.1.1.  ARGUMENTS

      /// struct CHUNK_COMMIT4args {
      ///     /* CURRENT_FH: file */
      ///     offset4         cca_offset;
      ///     count4          cca_count;
      ///     chunk_owner4    cca_chunks<>;
      /// };

                    Figure 52: XDR for CHUNK_COMMIT4args

26.1.2.  RESULTS

      /// struct CHUNK_COMMIT4resok {
      ///     verifier4       ccr_writeverf;
      ///     nfsstat4        ccr_status<>;
      /// };

                   Figure 53: XDR for CHUNK_COMMIT4resok

      /// union CHUNK_COMMIT4res switch (nfsstat4 ccr_status) {
      ///     case NFS4_OK:
      ///         CHUNK_COMMIT4resok   ccr_resok4;
      ///     default:
      ///         void;
      /// };

                    Figure 54: XDR for CHUNK_COMMIT4res

26.1.3.  DESCRIPTION

   CHUNK_COMMIT is COMMIT (see Section 18.3 of [RFC8881]) with
   additional semantics over the chunk_owner activating the blocks.  As
   such, all of the normal semantics of COMMIT directly apply.

   The main difference between the two operations is that CHUNK_COMMIT
   works on blocks and not a raw data stream.  As such cca_offset is the
   starting block offset in the file and not the byte offset in the
   file.  Some erasure coding types can have different block sizes
   depending on the block type.  Further, cca_count is a count of blocks
   to activate and not bytes to activate.

   Further, while it may appear that the combination of cca_offset and
   cca_count are redundant to cca_chunks, the purpose of cca_chunks is
   to allow the data server to differentiate between potentially
   multiple pending blocks.


   // Describe how CHUNK_COMMIT and CHUNK_FINALIZE interact.  How does
   // CHUNK_COMMIT interact with a locked chunk?
   //
   // -- Tom

26.2.  Operation 78: CHUNK_ERROR - Report Error on Cached Chunk Data

26.2.1.  ARGUMENTS

      /// struct CHUNK_ERROR4args {
      ///     /* CURRENT_FH: file */
      ///     stateid4        cea_stateid;
      ///     offset4         cea_offset;
      ///     count4          cea_count;
      ///     nfsstat4        cea_error;
      ///     chunk_owner4    cea_owner;
      /// };

                    Figure 55: XDR for CHUNK_ERROR4args

26.2.2.  RESULTS

      /// struct CHUNK_ERROR4res {
      ///     nfsstat4        cer_status;
      /// };

                     Figure 56: XDR for CHUNK_ERROR4res

26.2.3.  DESCRIPTION

   CHUNK_ERROR allows a client to report that one or more chunks at the
   specified block range are in error.  The cea_offset is the starting
   block offset and cea_count is the number of blocks affected.  The
   cea_error indicates the type of error detected (e.g.,
   NFS4ERR_PAYLOAD_NOT_CONSISTENT for a CRC mismatch).

   The data server records the error state for the affected blocks.
   Once marked as errored, the blocks are not returned by CHUNK_READ
   until they are repaired via CHUNK_WRITE_REPAIR (Section 26.11) and
   the repair is confirmed via CHUNK_REPAIRED (Section 26.7).

   The client SHOULD report errors via CHUNK_ERROR before reporting them
   to the metadata server via LAYOUTERROR.  This allows the data server
   to prevent other clients from reading corrupt data while the metadata
   server coordinates repair.

26.3.  Operation 79: CHUNK_FINALIZE - Transition Chunks from Pending to
       Finalized

26.3.1.  ARGUMENTS

      /// struct CHUNK_FINALIZE4args {
      ///     /* CURRENT_FH: file */
      ///     offset4         cfa_offset;
      ///     count4          cfa_count;
      ///     chunk_owner4    cfa_chunks<>;
      /// };

                   Figure 57: XDR for CHUNK_FINALIZE4args

26.3.2.  RESULTS

      /// struct CHUNK_FINALIZE4resok {
      ///     verifier4       cfr_writeverf;
      ///     nfsstat4        cfr_status<>;
      /// };

                  Figure 58: XDR for CHUNK_FINALIZE4resok

      /// union CHUNK_FINALIZE4res switch (nfsstat4 cfr_status) {
      ///     case NFS4_OK:
      ///         CHUNK_FINALIZE4resok   cfr_resok4;
      ///     default:
      ///         void;
      /// };

                   Figure 59: XDR for CHUNK_FINALIZE4res

26.3.3.  DESCRIPTION

   CHUNK_FINALIZE transitions blocks from the PENDING state (set by
   CHUNK_WRITE) to the FINALIZED state.  A finalized block is visible to
   the owning client for reads and is eligible for CHUNK_COMMIT.

   The cfa_offset is the starting block offset and cfa_count is the
   number of blocks to finalize.  The cfa_chunks array lists the
   chunk_owner4 entries whose blocks are to be finalized.  Each owner's
   blocks at the specified offsets MUST be in the PENDING state; if not,
   the corresponding entry in the per-owner status array ccr_status is
   set to NFS4ERR_INVAL.

   CHUNK_FINALIZE serves as the CRC validation checkpoint: the data
   server SHOULD have validated the CRC32 of each block at CHUNK_WRITE
   time.  After CHUNK_FINALIZE, the block metadata (CRC, owner, state)
   is persisted to stable storage so that it survives data server
   restarts.

   Blocks that have been finalized but not yet committed MAY be rolled
   back via CHUNK_ROLLBACK (Section 26.8).

26.4.  Operation 80: CHUNK_HEADER_READ - Read Chunk Header from File

26.4.1.  ARGUMENTS

      /// struct CHUNK_HEADER_READ4args {
      ///     /* CURRENT_FH: file */
      ///     stateid4    chra_stateid;
      ///     offset4     chra_offset;
      ///     count4      chra_count;
      /// };

                 Figure 60: XDR for CHUNK_HEADER_READ4args

26.4.2.  RESULTS

      /// struct CHUNK_HEADER_READ4resok {
      ///     bool            chrr_eof;
      ///     nfsstat4        chrr_status<>;
      ///     bool            chrr_locked<>;
      ///     chunk_owner4    chrr_chunks<>;
      /// };

                 Figure 61: XDR for CHUNK_HEADER_READ4resok


   // Do we want to have a chunk_owner for reads versus writes?  Instead
   // of co-arrays, have one single in the responses?
   //
   // -- Tom

      /// union CHUNK_HEADER_READ4res switch (nfsstat4 chrr_status) {
      ///     case NFS4_OK:
      ///         CHUNK_HEADER_READ4resok     chrr_resok4;
      ///     default:
      ///         void;
      /// };

                 Figure 62: XDR for CHUNK_HEADER_READ4resok

26.4.3.  DESCRIPTION

   CHUNK_HEADER_READ differs from CHUNK_READ in that it only reads chunk
   headers in the desired data range.

26.5.  Operation 81: CHUNK_LOCK - Lock Cached Chunk Data

26.5.1.  ARGUMENTS

      /// const CHUNK_LOCK_FLAGS_ADOPT  = 0x00000001;
      ///
      /// struct CHUNK_LOCK4args {
      ///     /* CURRENT_FH: file */
      ///     stateid4        cla_stateid;
      ///     offset4         cla_offset;
      ///     count4          cla_count;
      ///     uint32_t        cla_flags;
      ///     chunk_owner4    cla_owner;
      /// };

                     Figure 63: XDR for CHUNK_LOCK4args

26.5.2.  RESULTS

      /// union CHUNK_LOCK4res switch (nfsstat4 clr_status) {
      ///     case NFS4_OK:
      ///         void;
      ///     case NFS4ERR_CHUNK_LOCKED:
      ///         chunk_owner4    clr_owner;
      ///     default:
      ///         void;
      /// };

                     Figure 64: XDR for CHUNK_LOCK4res

26.5.3.  DESCRIPTION

   CHUNK_LOCK acquires an exclusive lock on the block range specified by
   cla_offset and cla_count.  While locked, other clients' CHUNK_WRITE
   operations to the same block range will fail with
   NFS4ERR_CHUNK_LOCKED.  The lock is associated with the chunk_owner4
   in cla_owner.

   If the blocks are already locked by a different owner and cla_flags
   does not include CHUNK_LOCK_FLAGS_ADOPT, the operation returns
   NFS4ERR_CHUNK_LOCKED with the clr_owner field identifying the current
   lock holder.

   CHUNK_LOCK is used in the multiple writer mode (Section 12.2.6.3) to
   coordinate concurrent access to the same block range, and in the
   repair flow (Section 12.2.4) to transfer lock ownership to a repair
   client.

   The lock is released by CHUNK_UNLOCK (Section 26.9) or implicitly
   when the client's lease expires.

26.5.3.1.  Lock Transfer via CHUNK_LOCK_FLAGS_ADOPT

   The CHUNK_LOCK_FLAGS_ADOPT flag in cla_flags requests an atomic
   transfer of lock ownership to cla_owner for every chunk in
   [cla_offset, cla_offset+cla_count).  The data server MUST perform the
   transfer as a single atomic step per chunk: there is no window in
   which the chunk is unlocked.  After a successful ADOPT, subsequent
   CHUNK_WRITE, CHUNK_WRITE_REPAIR, CHUNK_ROLLBACK, and CHUNK_UNLOCK
   operations MUST present cla_owner as their chunk_owner4.

   CHUNK_LOCK_FLAGS_ADOPT is the sole mechanism by which a chunk lock
   can change hands without first being released.  The lock ordering
   invariant -- that every chunk in a payload transitioning through
   repair is held by exactly one owner continuously from failure
   detection to repair completion -- depends on it.

   CHUNK_LOCK_FLAGS_ADOPT is valid only when the caller has been
   selected as the repair client for the range by the metadata server,
   typically via CB_CHUNK_REPAIR (Section 27.1).  A data server that
   receives CHUNK_LOCK with the ADOPT flag from a client that has not
   been so designated MAY reject the operation with NFS4ERR_ACCESS.  The
   mechanism by which the data server determines designation is
   coupling-model dependent:

   *  In a tightly coupled deployment, the metadata server notifies the
      data server via the control protocol (e.g., TRUST_STATEID with the
      new client's stateid or a similar facility).

   *  In a loosely coupled deployment, the data server MAY rely on the
      metadata server's authentication of the client and accept ADOPT
      from any authenticated client holding a current layout that
      includes the range.  The write-hole exposure cost is that a
      misbehaving client can trigger spurious ownership transfers; the
      write-hole exposure is bounded by the chunk_guard4 checks that
      subsequent CHUNK_WRITEs from displaced writers experience.

   The current lock holder at the moment of ADOPT MAY be:

   1.  Another client whose stateid remains valid (for example, a client
       that has stopped making progress but has not yet lost its lease).
       The prior owner's PENDING or FINALIZED shards remain on disk
       until the new owner issues CHUNK_WRITE_REPAIR, CHUNK_ROLLBACK, or
       CHUNK_COMMIT.

   2.  The metadata server itself, acting through the
       CHUNK_GUARD_CLIENT_ID_MDS escrow owner (Section 25.1.1).  This
       occurs when the metadata server has revoked the prior holder's
       stateid in a tightly coupled deployment.

   In either case, ADOPT's effect from the repair client's perspective
   is the same: after the successful return the caller holds the lock
   and may drive the range to consistency.

   The data server MUST reject CHUNK_LOCK with CHUNK_LOCK_FLAGS_ADOPT if
   cla_owner's cg_client_id equals CHUNK_GUARD_CLIENT_ID_MDS -- that
   value is reserved for server production and MUST NOT be presented by
   a client.  The operation returns NFS4ERR_INVAL in that case.

26.6.  Operation 82: CHUNK_READ - Read Chunks from File

26.6.1.  ARGUMENTS

      /// struct CHUNK_READ4args {
      ///     /* CURRENT_FH: file */
      ///     stateid4    cra_stateid;
      ///     offset4     cra_offset;
      ///     count4      cra_count;
      /// };

                     Figure 65: XDR for CHUNK_READ4args

26.6.2.  RESULTS

      /// struct read_chunk4 {
      ///     uint32_t        cr_crc;
      ///     uint32_t        cr_effective_len;
      ///     chunk_owner4    cr_owner;
      ///     uint32_t        cr_payload_id;
      ///     bool            cr_locked<>;  // TDH - make a flag
      ///     nfsstat4        cr_status<>;
      ///     opaque          cr_chunk<>;
      /// };

                       Figure 66: XDR for read_chunk4

      /// struct CHUNK_READ4resok {
      ///     bool        crr_eof;
      ///     read_chunk4 crr_chunks<>;
      /// };

                    Figure 67: XDR for CHUNK_READ4resok

      /// union CHUNK_READ4res switch (nfsstat4 crr_status) {
      ///     case NFS4_OK:
      ///          CHUNK_READ4resok     crr_resok4;
      ///     default:
      ///          void;
      /// };

                     Figure 68: XDR for CHUNK_READ4res

26.6.3.  DESCRIPTION

   CHUNK_READ is READ (see Section 18.22 of [RFC8881]) with additional
   semantics over the chunk_owner.  As such, all of the normal semantics
   of READ directly apply.

   The main difference between the two operations is that CHUNK_READ
   works on blocks and not a raw data stream.  As such cra_offset is the
   starting block offset in the file and not the byte offset in the
   file.  Some erasure coding types can have different block sizes
   depending on the block type.  Further, cra_count is a count of blocks
   to read and not bytes to read.

   When reading a set of blocks across the data servers, it can be the
   case that some data servers do not have any data at that location.
   In that case, the server either returns crr_eof if the cra_offset
   exceeds the number of blocks that the data server is aware or it
   returns an empty block for that block.

   For example, in Figure 69, the client asks for 4 blocks starting with
   the 3rd block in the file.  The second data server responds as in
   Figure 70.  The client would read this as there is valid data for
   blocks 2 and 4, there is a hole at block 3, and there is no data for
   block 5.  The data server MUST calculate a valid cr_crc for block 3
   based on the generated fields.

           Data Server 2
     +--------------------------------+
     | CHUNK_READ4args                |
     +--------------------------------+
     | cra_stateid: 0                 |
     | cra_offset: 2                  |
     | cra_count: 4                   |
     +----------+---------------------+

               Figure 69: Example: CHUNK_READ4args parameters

           Data Server 2
     +--------------------------------+
     | CHUNK_READ4resok               |
     +--------------------------------+
     | crr_eof: true                  |
     | crr_chunks[0]:                 |
     |     cr_crc: 0x3faddace         |
     |     cr_owner:                  |
     |         co_chunk_id: 2         |
     |         co_guard:              |
     |             cg_gen_id   : 3    |
     |             cg_client_id: 6    |
     |     cr_payload_id: 1           |
     |     cr_chunk: ....             |
     | crr_chunks[0]:                 |
     |     cr_crc: 0xdeade4e5         |
     |     cr_owner:                  |
     |         co_chunk_id: 3         |
     |         co_guard:              |
     |             cg_gen_id   : 0    |
     |             cg_client_id: 0    |
     |     cr_payload_id: 1           |
     |     cr_chunk: 0000...00000     |
     | crr_chunks[0]:                 |
     |     cr_crc: 0x7778abcd         |
     |     cr_owner:                  |
     |         co_chunk_id: 4         |
     |         co_guard:              |
     |             cg_gen_id   : 3    |
     |             cg_client_id: 6    |
     |     cr_payload_id: 1           |
     |     cr_chunk: ....             |
     +--------------------------------+

            Figure 70: Example: Resulting CHUNK_READ4resok reply

26.7.  Operation 83: CHUNK_REPAIRED - Confirm Repair of Errored Chunk
       Data

26.7.1.  ARGUMENTS

      /// struct CHUNK_REPAIRED4args {
      ///     /* CURRENT_FH: file */
      ///     stateid4        cra_stateid;
      ///     offset4         cra_offset;
      ///     count4          cra_count;
      ///     chunk_owner4    cra_owner;
      /// };

                   Figure 71: XDR for CHUNK_REPAIRED4args

26.7.2.  RESULTS

      /// union CHUNK_REPAIRED4res switch (nfsstat4 crr_status) {
      ///     case NFS4_OK:
      ///         void;
      ///     default:
      ///         void;
      /// };

                   Figure 72: XDR for CHUNK_REPAIRED4res

26.7.3.  DESCRIPTION

   CHUNK_REPAIRED signals that blocks previously marked as errored (via
   CHUNK_ERROR, Section 26.2) have been repaired.  The repair client
   writes replacement data via CHUNK_WRITE_REPAIR (Section 26.11), then
   calls CHUNK_REPAIRED to clear the error state and make the blocks
   available for normal reads.

   The cra_offset and cra_count identify the repaired block range.  The
   cra_owner identifies the repair client that performed the repair.
   The data server verifies that the blocks were previously in error and
   that the repair data has been written and finalized.

   If the blocks are not in the errored state, the operation returns
   NFS4ERR_INVAL.

26.8.  Operation 84: CHUNK_ROLLBACK - Rollback Changes on Cached Chunk
       Data

26.8.1.  ARGUMENTS

      /// struct CHUNK_ROLLBACK4args {
      ///     /* CURRENT_FH: file */
      ///     offset4         cra_offset;
      ///     count4          cra_count;
      ///     chunk_owner4    cra_chunks<>;
      /// };

                   Figure 73: XDR for CHUNK_ROLLBACK4args

26.8.2.  RESULTS

      /// struct CHUNK_ROLLBACK4resok {
      ///     verifier4       crr_writeverf;
      /// };

                  Figure 74: XDR for CHUNK_ROLLBACK4resok

      /// union CHUNK_ROLLBACK4res switch (nfsstat4 crr_status) {
      ///     case NFS4_OK:
      ///         CHUNK_ROLLBACK4resok   crr_resok4;
      ///     default:
      ///         void;
      /// };

                   Figure 75: XDR for CHUNK_ROLLBACK4res

26.8.3.  DESCRIPTION

   CHUNK_ROLLBACK reverts blocks from the PENDING or FINALIZED state
   back to their previous state, effectively undoing a CHUNK_WRITE that
   has not yet been committed via CHUNK_COMMIT.

   The cra_offset is the starting block offset and cra_count is the
   number of blocks to roll back.  The cra_chunks array lists the
   chunk_owner4 entries whose blocks are to be rolled back.  Each
   owner's blocks at the specified offsets MUST be in the PENDING or
   FINALIZED state; blocks that have already been committed via
   CHUNK_COMMIT cannot be rolled back.

   CHUNK_ROLLBACK is used in two scenarios:

   1.  A client discovers an encoding error after CHUNK_WRITE and before
       CHUNK_COMMIT, and needs to undo the write to try again.

   2.  A repair client needs to undo a repair attempt that was found to
       be incorrect before committing it.

   The data server deletes the pending chunk data and restores the block
   metadata to EMPTY.  If the block was in the FINALIZED state, the
   persisted metadata is also removed.

26.9.  Operation 85: CHUNK_UNLOCK - Unlock Cached Chunk Data

26.9.1.  ARGUMENTS

      /// struct CHUNK_UNLOCK4args {
      ///     /* CURRENT_FH: file */
      ///     stateid4        cua_stateid;
      ///     offset4         cua_offset;
      ///     count4          cua_count;
      ///     chunk_owner4    cua_owner;
      /// };

                    Figure 76: XDR for CHUNK_UNLOCK4args

26.9.2.  RESULTS

      /// union CHUNK_UNLOCK4res switch (nfsstat4 cur_status) {
      ///     case NFS4_OK:
      ///         void;
      ///     default:
      ///         void;
      /// };

                    Figure 77: XDR for CHUNK_UNLOCK4res

26.9.3.  DESCRIPTION

   CHUNK_UNLOCK releases the exclusive lock on the block range
   previously acquired by CHUNK_LOCK (Section 26.5).  The cua_owner MUST
   match the owner that acquired the lock; otherwise the operation
   returns NFS4ERR_INVAL.

   If the blocks are not locked, the operation returns NFS4_OK
   (idempotent).

   A client SHOULD release chunk locks promptly after completing its
   write or repair operation.  Chunk locks are also released implicitly
   when the client's lease expires.

26.10.  Operation 86: CHUNK_WRITE - Write Chunks to File

26.10.1.  ARGUMENTS

      /// union write_chunk_guard4 switch (bool cwg_check) {
      ///     case TRUE:
      ///         chunk_guard4   cwg_guard;
      ///     case FALSE:
      ///         void;
      /// };

                   Figure 78: XDR for write_chunk_guard4

      /// const CHUNK_WRITE_FLAGS_ACTIVATE_IF_EMPTY = 0x00000001;
      ///
      /// struct CHUNK_WRITE4args {
      ///     /* CURRENT_FH: file */
      ///     stateid4           cwa_stateid;
      ///     offset4            cwa_offset;
      ///     stable_how4        cwa_stable;
      ///     chunk_owner4       cwa_owner;
      ///     uint32_t           cwa_payload_id;
      ///     uint32_t           cwa_flags;
      ///     write_chunk_guard4 cwa_guard;
      ///     uint32_t           cwa_chunk_size;
      ///     uint32_t           cwa_crc32s<>;
      ///     opaque             cwa_chunks<>;
      /// };

                    Figure 79: XDR for CHUNK_WRITE4args

26.10.2.  RESULTS

      /// struct CHUNK_WRITE4resok {
      ///     count4          cwr_count;
      ///     stable_how4     cwr_committed;
      ///     verifier4       cwr_writeverf;
      ///     nfsstat4        cwr_block_status<>;
      ///     bool            cwr_block_activated<>;
      ///     chunk_owner4    cwr_owners<>;
      /// };

                    Figure 80: XDR for CHUNK_WRITE4resok

      /// union CHUNK_WRITE4res switch (nfsstat4 cwr_status) {
      ///     case NFS4_OK:
      ///         CHUNK_WRITE4resok    cwr_resok4;
      ///     default:
      ///         void;
      /// };

                     Figure 81: XDR for CHUNK_WRITE4res

26.10.3.  DESCRIPTION

   CHUNK_WRITE is WRITE (see Section 18.32 of [RFC8881]) with additional
   semantics over the chunk_owner and the activation of blocks.  As
   such, all of the normal semantics of WRITE directly apply.

   The main difference between the two operations is that CHUNK_WRITE
   works on blocks and not a raw data stream.  As such cwa_offset is the
   starting block offset in the file and not the byte offset in the
   file.  Some erasure coding types can have different block sizes
   depending on the block type.  Further, cwr_count is a count of
   written blocks and not written bytes.

   If cwa_stable is FILE_SYNC4, the data server MUST commit the written
   header and block data plus all file system metadata to stable storage
   before returning results.  This corresponds to the NFSv2 protocol
   semantics.  Any other behavior constitutes a protocol violation.  If
   cwa_stable is DATA_SYNC4, then the data server MUST commit all of the
   header and block data to stable storage and enough of the metadata to
   retrieve the data before returning.  The data server implementer is
   free to implement DATA_SYNC4 in the same fashion as FILE_SYNC4, but
   with a possible performance drop.  If cwa_stable is UNSTABLE4, the
   data server is free to commit any part of the header and block data
   and the metadata to stable storage, including all or none, before
   returning a reply to the client.  There is no guarantee whether or
   when any uncommitted data will subsequently be committed to stable
   storage.  The only guarantees made by the data server are that it
   will not destroy any data without changing the value of writeverf and
   that it will not commit the data and metadata at a level less than
   that requested by the client.

   The activation of header and block data interacts with the
   co_activated for each of the written blocks.  If the data is not
   committed to stable storage then the co_activated field MUST NOT be
   set to true.  Once the data is committed to stable storage, then the
   data server can set the block's co_activated if one of these
   conditions apply:

   *  it is the first write to that block and the
      CHUNK_WRITE_FLAGS_ACTIVATE_IF_EMPTY flag is set

   *  the CHUNK_COMMIT is issued later for that block.

   There are subtle interactions with write holes caused by racing
   clients.  One client could win the race in each case, but because it
   used a cwa_stable of UNSTABLE4, the subsequent writes from the second
   client with a cwa_stable of FILE_SYNC4 can be awarded the
   co_activated being set to true for each of the blocks in the payload.

   Finally, the interaction of cwa_stable can cause a client to
   mistakenly believe that by the time it gets the response of
   co_activated of false, that the blocks are not activated.  A
   subsequent CHUNK_READ or HEADER_READ might show that the co_activated
   is true without any interaction by the client via CHUNK_COMMIT.

26.10.3.1.  Guarding the Write

   A guarded CHUNK_WRITE is when the writing of a block MUST fail if
   cwa_guard.cwg_check is TRUE and the target chunk does not have the
   same cg_gen_id as cwa_guard.cwg_guard.cg_gen_id.  This is useful in
   read-update-write scenarios.  The client reads a block, updates it,
   and is prepared to write it back.  It guards the write such that if
   another writer has modified the block, the data server will reject
   the modification.

   As the chunk_guard4 (see Figure 49 does not have a chunk_id and the
   CHUNK_WRITE applies to all blocks in the range of cwa_offset to the
   length of cwa_data, then each of the target blocks MUST have the same
   cg_gen_id and cg_client_id.  The client SHOULD present the smallest
   set of blocks as possible to meet this requirement.


   // Is the DS supposed to vet all blocks first or proceed to the first
   // error?  Or do all blocks and return an array of errors?  (This
   // last one is a no-go.)  Also, if we do the vet first, what happens
   // if a CHUNK_WRITE comes in after the vetting?  Are we to lock the
   // file during this process.  Even if we do that, we still have the
   // issue of multiple DSes.
   //
   // -- Tom

26.11.  Operation 87: CHUNK_WRITE_REPAIR - Write Repaired Cached Chunk
        Data

26.11.1.  ARGUMENTS

      /// struct CHUNK_WRITE_REPAIR4args {
      ///     /* CURRENT_FH: file */
      ///     stateid4           cwra_stateid;
      ///     offset4            cwra_offset;
      ///     stable_how4        cwra_stable;
      ///     chunk_owner4       cwra_owner;
      ///     uint32_t           cwra_payload_id;
      ///     uint32_t           cwra_chunk_size;
      ///     uint32_t           cwra_crc32s<>;
      ///     opaque             cwra_chunks<>;
      /// };

                 Figure 82: XDR for CHUNK_WRITE_REPAIR4args

26.11.2.  RESULTS

      /// struct CHUNK_WRITE_REPAIR4resok {
      ///     count4          cwrr_count;
      ///     stable_how4     cwrr_committed;
      ///     verifier4       cwrr_writeverf;
      ///     nfsstat4        cwrr_status<>;
      /// };

                Figure 83: XDR for CHUNK_WRITE_REPAIR4resok

      /// union CHUNK_WRITE_REPAIR4res switch (nfsstat4 cwrr_status) {
      ///     case NFS4_OK:
      ///         CHUNK_WRITE_REPAIR4resok   cwrr_resok4;
      ///     default:
      ///         void;
      /// };

                 Figure 84: XDR for CHUNK_WRITE_REPAIR4res

26.11.3.  DESCRIPTION

   CHUNK_WRITE_REPAIR has the same semantics as CHUNK_WRITE
   (Section 26.10) but is used specifically for writing reconstructed
   chunk data to a replacement data server during repair operations.

   The repair workflow is:

   1.  The repair client reads surviving chunks from the remaining data
       servers via CHUNK_READ.

   2.  The client reconstructs the missing chunks using the erasure
       coding algorithm (RS matrix inversion or Mojette corner-peeling).

   3.  The client acquires a CHUNK_LOCK (Section 26.5) on the target
       data server to prevent concurrent writes during repair.

   4.  The client writes the reconstructed data via CHUNK_WRITE_REPAIR.

   5.  The client calls CHUNK_FINALIZE and CHUNK_COMMIT to persist the
       repair.

   6.  The client calls CHUNK_REPAIRED (Section 26.7) to clear the error
       state.

   7.  The client releases the lock via CHUNK_UNLOCK (Section 26.9).

   CHUNK_WRITE_REPAIR is distinguished from CHUNK_WRITE to allow the
   data server to apply different policies to repair writes (e.g.,
   bypassing guard checks, logging repair activity, or prioritizing
   repair I/O).  The CRC32 validation on the repair data follows the
   same rules as CHUNK_WRITE.

   The target blocks SHOULD be in the errored state (set by CHUNK_ERROR)
   or EMPTY.  If the blocks are in the COMMITTED state with valid data,
   the data server MAY reject the repair to prevent overwriting good
   data.

26.12.  Operation 88: TRUST_STATEID - Register Layout Stateid on Data
        Server

26.12.1.  ARGUMENTS

      /// struct TRUST_STATEID4args {
      ///     /* CURRENT_FH: file */
      ///     stateid4        tsa_layout_stateid;
      ///     layoutiomode4   tsa_iomode;
      ///     nfstime4        tsa_expire;
      ///     utf8str_cs      tsa_principal;
      /// };

                   Figure 85: XDR for TRUST_STATEID4args

26.12.2.  RESULTS

      /// union TRUST_STATEID4res switch (nfsstat4 tsr_status) {
      ///     case NFS4_OK:
      ///         void;
      ///     default:
      ///         void;
      /// };

                    Figure 86: XDR for TRUST_STATEID4res

26.12.3.  DESCRIPTION

   TRUST_STATEID registers a layout stateid with the data server so that
   subsequent CHUNK operations presenting that stateid can be validated
   against the data server's per-file trust table.  It is the mechanism
   by which tight coupling (see Section 6.4) is established between the
   metadata server and the data server for a particular layout.

   TRUST_STATEID operates on the current filehandle; a PUTFH naming the
   data server's file MUST precede it in the same compound.

   tsa_layout_stateid is the stateid the metadata server issued in the
   LAYOUTGET that produced this layout.  It MUST NOT be a special
   stateid (anonymous, invalid, read-bypass, or current).  The sole
   exception is the capability probe described in Section 6.4.1: when
   the metadata server sends TRUST_STATEID with tsa_layout_stateid set
   to the anonymous stateid against the root filehandle, the data server
   MUST reject the request with NFS4ERR_INVAL.  That rejection is the
   positive response to the probe.

   tsa_iomode is the iomode of the layout (LAYOUTIOMODE4_READ or
   LAYOUTIOMODE4_RW).  The data server MAY enforce this against the
   CHUNK operation presented: a READ-iomode trust entry does not
   authorize CHUNK_WRITE.

   tsa_expire is the absolute wall-clock time at which the trust entry
   becomes invalid if not renewed.  See Section 6.4.6.  The data server
   MUST reject a TRUST_STATEID whose tsa_expire has tv_nseconds >= 10^9
   with NFS4ERR_INVAL.

   tsa_principal is the client's authenticated identity as verified by
   the metadata server at LAYOUTGET time.  For RPCSEC_GSS clients this
   is the GSS display name (e.g., "alice@REALM").  For AUTH_SYS and TLS
   clients, tsa_principal MUST be the empty string, indicating that no
   principal binding is enforced on subsequent CHUNK operations.  See
   Section 6.4.4.

   If the data server receives TRUST_STATEID on a session whose owning
   client did not present EXCHGID4_FLAG_USE_PNFS_MDS at EXCHANGE_ID, the
   data server MUST return NFS4ERR_PERM.  The data server MUST NOT
   process TRUST_STATEID on a regular client session.

   If a trust entry already exists for the same tsa_layout_stateid on
   the same current filehandle, TRUST_STATEID atomically updates
   tsa_expire and tsa_principal; this is the renewal path (see
   Section 6.4.6).

   At registration time, the data server tags the new trust entry with
   the identity of the metadata server -- derived from the clientid of
   the owning client of the control session on which TRUST_STATEID
   arrived.  This tag is consulted by REVOKE_STATEID and
   BULK_REVOKE_STATEID to ensure that revocation only affects entries
   registered by the same metadata server (see Section 26.14).  In a
   multi-metadata-server deployment sharing a single data server, each
   metadata server registers and revokes only its own entries; the tag
   is opaque to pNFS clients and is not carried on the wire.

26.12.4.  RESPONSE CODES

   *  NFS4_OK: the trust entry is registered (or updated).

   *  NFS4ERR_BADXDR: arguments could not be decoded.

   *  NFS4ERR_BAD_STATEID: tsa_layout_stateid was a special stateid
      other than the anonymous stateid on the root filehandle.

   *  NFS4ERR_DELAY: the data server is temporarily unable to process
      the request; the metadata server SHOULD retry.

   *  NFS4ERR_INVAL: tsa_layout_stateid was the anonymous stateid and
      the current filehandle is not the root filehandle; tsa_expire is
      malformed; or the current filehandle is a directory (except in the
      capability-probe case).

   *  NFS4ERR_NOFILEHANDLE: no current filehandle is set.

   *  NFS4ERR_NOTSUPP: the data server does not implement TRUST_STATEID.
      This is the capability-probe response (see Section 6.4.1).

   *  NFS4ERR_PERM: the request arrived on a session whose owning client
      did not present EXCHGID4_FLAG_USE_PNFS_MDS.

   *  NFS4ERR_SERVERFAULT: the data server failed while processing the
      request.

26.13.  Operation 89: REVOKE_STATEID - Revoke Registered Stateid on Data
        Server

26.13.1.  ARGUMENTS

      /// struct REVOKE_STATEID4args {
      ///     /* CURRENT_FH: file */
      ///     stateid4        rsa_layout_stateid;
      /// };

                   Figure 87: XDR for REVOKE_STATEID4args

26.13.2.  RESULTS

      /// union REVOKE_STATEID4res switch (nfsstat4 rsr_status) {
      ///     case NFS4_OK:
      ///         void;
      ///     default:
      ///         void;
      /// };

                   Figure 88: XDR for REVOKE_STATEID4res

26.13.3.  DESCRIPTION

   REVOKE_STATEID invalidates a single trust entry on the data server.
   Subsequent CHUNK operations that present the revoked stateid MUST
   fail with NFS4ERR_BAD_STATEID.

   The metadata server calls REVOKE_STATEID in any of the following
   situations:

   *  CB_LAYOUTRECALL timeout: the client did not return the layout
      within the recall timeout.  REVOKE_STATEID terminates the client's
      ability to issue further I/O to the data server without waiting
      for tsa_expire.

   *  LAYOUTERROR with NFS4ERR_ACCESS or NFS4ERR_PERM: the data server
      rejected the client's I/O; the trust entry is stale and must be
      removed.  This mirrors the fencing case in the loose-coupled
      model.

   *  Explicit LAYOUTRETURN: the client returned the layout cleanly.
      The metadata server MAY issue REVOKE_STATEID at this time or MAY
      rely on tsa_expire; either is correct.

   REVOKE_STATEID operates on the current filehandle; a PUTFH naming the
   data server's file MUST precede it in the same compound.  The
   filehandle and rsa_layout_stateid together identify the trust entry
   to revoke.

   In-flight CHUNK operations that arrived before REVOKE_STATEID
   completes MAY be allowed to finish.  The data server MUST NOT process
   new CHUNK operations presenting rsa_layout_stateid after
   REVOKE_STATEID returns.

   Lock state (see Section 26.5) held by the revoked stateid is NOT
   released as part of REVOKE_STATEID; the data server MUST transfer
   each held lock to the MDS-escrow owner (see Section 25.1.1).
   Dropping a chunk lock during revocation would permit a write hole and
   is prohibited; the repair coordination sequence in Section 12.2.4
   assumes that locks held by a revoked writer remain held until a
   repair client adopts them via CHUNK_LOCK with CHUNK_LOCK_FLAGS_ADOPT.

   If the data server receives REVOKE_STATEID on a session whose owning
   client did not present EXCHGID4_FLAG_USE_PNFS_MDS at EXCHANGE_ID, the
   data server MUST return NFS4ERR_PERM.

   REVOKE_STATEID is scoped to the issuing metadata server's entries
   (see the tagging rule in Section 26.12).  The data server MUST NOT
   remove an entry that was registered by a different metadata server,
   even if rsa_layout_stateid happens to match.  In a multi-metadata-
   server deployment, one metadata server therefore cannot revoke
   another metadata server's entries.

   REVOKE_STATEID is idempotent: revoking a stateid that has no matching
   trust entry (either no entry exists, or the entry was registered by a
   different metadata server) returns NFS4_OK.  The metadata server
   therefore does not need to track precisely which entries are
   currently live on which data server in order to revoke safely.

26.13.4.  RESPONSE CODES

   *  NFS4_OK: the trust entry was removed, or no matching entry existed
      (idempotent).

   *  NFS4ERR_BADXDR: arguments could not be decoded.

   *  NFS4ERR_BAD_STATEID: rsa_layout_stateid was a special stateid.

   *  NFS4ERR_DELAY: the data server is temporarily unable to process
      the request.

   *  NFS4ERR_INVAL: rsa_layout_stateid was the anonymous stateid.

   *  NFS4ERR_NOFILEHANDLE: no current filehandle is set.

   *  NFS4ERR_NOTSUPP: the data server does not implement
      REVOKE_STATEID.

   *  NFS4ERR_PERM: the request arrived on a session whose owning client
      did not present EXCHGID4_FLAG_USE_PNFS_MDS.

   *  NFS4ERR_SERVERFAULT: the data server failed while processing the
      request.

26.14.  Operation 90: BULK_REVOKE_STATEID - Revoke All Stateids for a
        Client

26.14.1.  ARGUMENTS

      /// struct BULK_REVOKE_STATEID4args {
      ///     clientid4       brsa_clientid;
      /// };

                Figure 89: XDR for BULK_REVOKE_STATEID4args

26.14.2.  RESULTS

      /// union BULK_REVOKE_STATEID4res switch (nfsstat4 brsr_status) {
      ///     case NFS4_OK:
      ///         void;
      ///     default:
      ///         void;
      /// };

                 Figure 90: XDR for BULK_REVOKE_STATEID4res

26.14.3.  DESCRIPTION

   BULK_REVOKE_STATEID removes every trust entry on the data server that
   was registered on behalf of the named client.  The data server
   applies this as a scan over its trust table.

   The metadata server calls BULK_REVOKE_STATEID in any of the following
   situations:

   *  Client lease expiry: when a client's lease on the metadata server
      expires, the metadata server revokes all of that client's layouts.
      A single BULK_REVOKE_STATEID replaces the N per-file
      REVOKE_STATEID compounds that per-entry revocation would require.

   *  CB_LAYOUTRECALL with LAYOUTRECALL4_ALL: the metadata server is
      recalling all layouts for a client.  BULK_REVOKE_STATEID is the
      data-server-side complement.

   *  Metadata server restart cleanup: after the metadata server
      reconnects to a data server, it MAY issue
      BULK_REVOKE_STATEID(brsa_clientid = all-zeros) to clear the prior
      trust table before re-issuing TRUST_STATEID as clients reclaim.
      See Section 6.4.8.

   BULK_REVOKE_STATEID is scoped to the issuing metadata server's
   entries (see the tagging rule in Section 26.12).  The data server
   MUST NOT affect entries registered by a different metadata server.
   Consequently, in a multi-metadata-server deployment sharing a single
   data server, one metadata server cannot clear another metadata
   server's entries via BULK_REVOKE_STATEID.

   The special value with all fields of brsa_clientid set to zero means
   "revoke every entry owned by the issuing metadata server, regardless
   of which pNFS client registered it".  The data server MUST interpret
   this value as a clear of the issuing metadata server's entries only,
   and MUST NOT treat it either as "the pNFS client whose clientid
   happens to be zero" or as a global table clear across metadata
   servers.

   BULK_REVOKE_STATEID does not operate on the current filehandle; no
   PUTFH is required in the compound.

   If the data server receives BULK_REVOKE_STATEID on a session whose
   owning client did not present EXCHGID4_FLAG_USE_PNFS_MDS at
   EXCHANGE_ID, the data server MUST return NFS4ERR_PERM.

   Like REVOKE_STATEID, BULK_REVOKE_STATEID is idempotent (no error is
   returned if there are no matching entries) and preserves chunk locks
   held under any revoked stateid by transferring them to the MDS-escrow
   owner (see Section 25.1.1), rather than dropping them.

26.14.4.  RESPONSE CODES

   *  NFS4_OK: the matching entries were removed, or there were none
      (idempotent).

   *  NFS4ERR_BADXDR: arguments could not be decoded.

   *  NFS4ERR_DELAY: the data server is temporarily unable to process
      the request.

   *  NFS4ERR_NOTSUPP: the data server does not implement
      BULK_REVOKE_STATEID.

   *  NFS4ERR_PERM: the request arrived on a session whose owning client
      did not present EXCHGID4_FLAG_USE_PNFS_MDS.

   *  NFS4ERR_SERVERFAULT: the data server failed while processing the
      request.

27.  New NFSv4.2 Callback Operations

      ///
      /// /* New callback operations for Erasure Coding start here */
      ///
      ///  OP_CB_CHUNK_REPAIR     = 16,
      ///

                     Figure 91: Callback Operations XDR

27.1.  Callback Operation 16: CB_CHUNK_REPAIR - Request Repair of
       Inconsistent Chunk Ranges

27.1.1.  ARGUMENTS

      /// struct cb_chunk_range4 {
      ///     offset4         ccr_offset;
      ///     count4          ccr_count;
      ///     nfsstat4        ccr_error;
      /// };
      ///
      /// struct CB_CHUNK_REPAIR4args {
      ///     nfs_fh4            ccra_fh;
      ///     stateid4           ccra_layout_stateid;
      ///     nfstime4           ccra_deadline;
      ///     cb_chunk_range4    ccra_ranges<>;
      /// };

                  Figure 92: XDR for CB_CHUNK_REPAIR4args

27.1.2.  RESULTS

      /// struct CB_CHUNK_REPAIR4res {
      ///     nfsstat4           ccrr_status;
      /// };

                   Figure 93: XDR for CB_CHUNK_REPAIR4res

27.1.3.  DESCRIPTION

   CB_CHUNK_REPAIR is sent by the metadata server to request that a
   selected client repair one or more inconsistent chunk ranges.
   Selection follows the rules in Section 12.2.4; those rules are
   normative for how the client MUST respond on receipt of this
   callback.

   The ccra_fh identifies the file whose chunks are inconsistent.  The
   callback compound carries the filehandle directly; there is no
   preceding PUTFH in callback compounds.

   The ccra_layout_stateid carries the recipient client's current layout
   stateid for the file if one is held.  A client that does not hold a
   layout on ccra_fh MUST ignore ccra_layout_stateid (it will be the
   anonymous stateid) and MUST acquire one via LAYOUTGET before issuing
   any CHUNK operation on the ranges.

   The ccra_deadline is a wall-clock nfstime4 (seconds and nanoseconds
   since the epoch, as defined in Section 3.3.1 of [RFC8881]) by which
   the client is expected to have driven every range to completion
   (CHUNK_REPAIRED on the reconstruction path, or CHUNK_UNLOCK on the
   rollback path).  Missing the deadline does not corrupt state -- the
   metadata server MAY re-select another repair client after the
   deadline elapses -- but a client that has missed the deadline MUST
   re-verify its layout and the chunk lock state before continuing any
   repair-related CHUNK operation.

   The ccra_ranges array lists every chunk range the metadata server
   requests the client to repair.  Each entry carries its own ccr_error
   describing the failure mode the client is being asked to remedy.  The
   repair strategy depends on the error code; see Section 12.2.4 for the
   normative and guidance split.

   The metadata server SHOULD keep each CB_CHUNK_REPAIR compound within
   the back-channel maximum (ca_maxrequestsize) negotiated in
   CREATE_SESSION (see Section 18.36.3 of [RFC8881]).  If the set of
   affected ranges would exceed that maximum, the metadata server MAY
   issue multiple CB_CHUNK_REPAIR callbacks to the same client.  Each
   callback is independent; the client drives each to completion before
   the deadline on that callback's ranges.

   The fact that a range appears in ccra_ranges implies the data server
   holds a chunk lock on the range (the failure occurred in or around a
   PENDING or FINALIZED state that established the lock).  The repair
   client MUST use CHUNK_LOCK with CHUNK_LOCK_FLAGS_ADOPT (Section 26.5)
   to take ownership of the lock before issuing CHUNK_WRITE_REPAIR,
   CHUNK_ROLLBACK, or CHUNK_WRITE on any chunk in a requested range.

27.1.4.  Response Codes

   The ccrr_status value returned by the client has the following
   normative meanings to the metadata server:

   NFS4_OK  The client has accepted the request and driven every range
      in this callback to completion (CHUNK_REPAIRED or CHUNK_UNLOCK on
      every affected chunk).  The metadata server clears the repair
      queue entry.

   NFS4ERR_DELAY  The client has accepted the request but requires more
      time.  The metadata server MAY extend the deadline by issuing a
      new CB_CHUNK_REPAIR with a later ccra_deadline, or MAY re-select
      another client.  The client continues to hold any locks it has
      adopted until the original or extended deadline.

   NFS4ERR_CODING_NOT_SUPPORTED  The client does not implement the
      encoding type of the layout and cannot reconstruct.  The metadata
      server MUST NOT retry with the same client and SHOULD select a
      different client.

   NFS4ERR_PAYLOAD_LOST  The client has concluded that the identified
      ranges cannot be repaired -- there are not enough surviving shards
      to reconstruct and rollback is also impossible.  The metadata
      server MUST NOT retry the repair and transitions the affected
      ranges into an implementation-defined damaged state.  See
      Section 22.1.5.

   All other error codes listed in Table 7 are treated by the metadata
   server as retriable: the metadata server MAY issue a subsequent
   CB_CHUNK_REPAIR to the same or a different client.  If the client
   becomes unreachable (no response within the deadline), the metadata
   server re-selects per Section 12.2.4.

28.  Security Considerations

   The combination of components in a pNFS system is required to
   preserve the security properties of NFSv4.1+ with respect to an
   entity accessing data via a client.  The pNFS feature partitions the
   NFSv4.1+ file system protocol into two parts: the control protocol
   and the data protocol.  As the control protocol in this document is
   NFS, the security properties are equivalent to the version of NFS
   being used.  The flexible file layout further divides the data
   protocol into metadata and data paths.  The security properties of
   the metadata path are equivalent to those of NFSv4.1x (see Sections
   1.7.1 and 2.2.1 of [RFC8881]).  And the security properties of the
   data path are equivalent to those of the version of NFS used to
   access the storage device, with the provision that the metadata
   server is responsible for authenticating client access to the data
   file.  The metadata server provides appropriate credentials to the
   client to access data files on the storage device.  It is also
   responsible for revoking access for a client to the storage device.

   The metadata server enforces the file access control policy at
   LAYOUTGET time.  The client MUST use RPC authorization credentials
   for getting the layout for the requested iomode ((LAYOUTIOMODE4_READ
   or LAYOUTIOMODE4_RW), and the server verifies the permissions and ACL
   for these credentials, possibly returning NFS4ERR_ACCESS if the
   client is not allowed the requested iomode.  If the LAYOUTGET
   operation succeeds, the client receives, as part of the layout, a set
   of credentials allowing it I/O access to the specified data files
   corresponding to the requested iomode.  When the client acts on I/O
   operations on behalf of its local users, it MUST authenticate and
   authorize the user by issuing respective OPEN and ACCESS calls to the
   metadata server, similar to having NFSv4 data delegations.

   The combination of filehandle, synthetic uid, and gid in the layout
   is the way that the metadata server enforces access control to the
   data server.  The client only has access to filehandles of file
   objects and not directory objects.  Thus, given a filehandle in a
   layout, it is not possible to guess the parent directory filehandle.
   Further, as the data file permissions only allow the given synthetic
   uid read/write permission and the given synthetic gid read
   permission, knowing the synthetic ids of one file does not
   necessarily allow access to any other data file on the storage
   device.

   The metadata server can also deny access at any time by fencing the
   data file, which means changing the synthetic ids.  In turn, that
   forces the client to return its current layout and get a new layout
   if it wants to continue I/O to the data file.

   If access is allowed, the client uses the corresponding (read-only or
   read/write) credentials to perform the I/O operations at the data
   file's storage devices.  When the metadata server receives a request
   to change a file's permissions or ACL, it SHOULD recall all layouts
   for that file and then MUST fence off any clients still holding
   outstanding layouts for the respective files by implicitly
   invalidating the previously distributed credential on all data file
   comprising the file in question.  It is REQUIRED that this be done
   before committing to the new permissions and/or ACL.  By requesting
   new layouts, the clients will reauthorize access against the modified
   access control metadata.  Recalling the layouts in this case is
   intended to prevent clients from getting an error on I/Os done after
   the client was fenced off.

28.1.  CRC32 Integrity Scope

   The CRC32 values carried in CHUNK_WRITE and returned from CHUNK_READ
   are intended to detect accidental data corruption during storage or
   transmission — for example, bit flips in storage media or network
   errors.  CRC32 is not a cryptographic hash and does not protect
   against intentional modification: an adversary with access to the
   network path could replace a chunk and recompute a valid CRC32 to
   match.  The "data integrity" provided by the CRC32 mechanism in this
   document refers to error detection, not protection against an active
   attacker.  Deployments requiring protection against active attackers
   SHOULD use RPC-over-TLS (see Section 28.4) or RPCSEC_GSS.

28.2.  Chunk Lock and Lease Expiry

   When a client holds a chunk lock (acquired via CHUNK_LOCK) and its
   lease expires or the client crashes, the lock is released implicitly
   by the data server.  This opens a window in which another client may
   write to the previously locked range before the original client's
   repair is complete.  Implementations SHOULD ensure that the lease
   period for chunk locks is sufficient to complete repair operations,
   and SHOULD implement CHUNK_UNLOCK explicitly on abort paths.  The
   metadata server's LAYOUTERROR and LAYOUTRETURN mechanisms provide the
   coordination point for detecting and resolving such races.

28.3.  Error Code Information Disclosure

   The new error codes NFS4ERR_CHUNK_LOCKED (10099) and
   NFS4ERR_PAYLOAD_NOT_CONSISTENT (10098) convey information about chunk
   state to the caller.  Both of these errors MAY be returned to callers
   whose credentials have not been verified by the data server (e.g.,
   when the AUTH_SYS uid presented does not match the synthetic uid on
   the data file).  The information they reveal — that a chunk is
   locked, or that a CRC mismatch occurred — does not directly disclose
   file contents but may indicate concurrent write activity.
   Implementations that are concerned about this level of disclosure
   SHOULD require that operations on CHUNK ops only succeed after
   credential verification and return NFS4ERR_ACCESS for unverified
   callers rather than the more specific error codes.

28.4.  Transport Layer Security

   RPC-over-TLS [RFC9289] MAY be used to protect traffic between the
   client and the metadata server and between the client and data
   servers.  When RPC-over-TLS is in use on the data server path, the
   synthetic uid/gid credentials carried in AUTH_SYS remain the access
   control mechanism; TLS provides confidentiality and integrity for the
   transport but does not replace the fencing model described in
   Section 6.2.  Servers that require transport security SHOULD
   advertise this via the SECINFO mechanism rather than silently
   dropping connections.

28.5.  RPCSEC_GSS and Security Services

   _Why we don't want to support RPCSEC_GSS._

   Because of the special use of principals within the loosely coupled
   model, the issues are different depending on the coupling model.

28.5.1.  Loosely Coupled

   RPCSEC_GSS version 3 (RPCSEC_GSSv3) [RFC7861] contains facilities
   that would allow it to be used to authorize the client to the storage
   device on behalf of the metadata server.  Doing so would require that
   each of the metadata server, storage device, and client would need to
   implement RPCSEC_GSSv3 using an RPC-application-defined structured
   privilege assertion in a manner described in Section 4.9.1 of
   [RFC7862].  The specifics necessary to do so are not described in
   this document.  This is principally because any such specification
   would require extensive implementation work on a wide range of
   storage devices, which would be unlikely to result in a widely usable
   specification for a considerable time.

   As a result, the layout type described in this document will not
   provide support for use of RPCSEC_GSS together with the loosely
   coupled model.  However, future layout types could be specified,
   which would allow such support, either through the use of
   RPCSEC_GSSv3 or in other ways.

28.5.2.  Tightly Coupled

   With tight coupling, the principal used to access the metadata file
   is exactly the same as used to access the data file.  The storage
   device can use the control protocol to validate any RPC credentials.
   As a result, there are no security issues related to using RPCSEC_GSS
   with a tightly coupled system.  For example, if Kerberos V5 Generic
   Security Service Application Program Interface (GSS-API) [RFC4121] is
   used as the security mechanism, then the storage device could use a
   control protocol to validate the RPC credentials to the metadata
   server.

29.  IANA Considerations

   [RFC8881] introduced the "pNFS Layout Types Registry"; new layout
   type numbers in this registry need to be assigned by IANA.  This
   document defines a new layout type number: LAYOUT4_FLEX_FILES_V2 (see
   Table 10).

    +=======================+=======+==========+=====+================+
    | Layout Type Name      | Value | RFC      | How | Minor Versions |
    +=======================+=======+==========+=====+================+
    | LAYOUT4_FLEX_FILES_V2 | 0x5   | RFCTBD10 | L   | 1              |
    +-----------------------+-------+----------+-----+----------------+

                     Table 10: Layout Type Assignments

   [RFC8881] also introduced the "NFSv4 Recallable Object Types
   Registry".  This document defines new recallable objects for
   RCA4_TYPE_MASK_FF2_LAYOUT_MIN and RCA4_TYPE_MASK_FF2_LAYOUT_MAX (see
   Table 11).

    +===============================+=======+==========+===+==========+
    | Recallable Object Type Name   | Value | RFC      |How| Minor    |
    |                               |       |          |   | Versions |
    +===============================+=======+==========+===+==========+
    | RCA4_TYPE_MASK_FF2_LAYOUT_MIN | 20    | RFCTBD10 |L  | 1        |
    +-------------------------------+-------+----------+---+----------+
    | RCA4_TYPE_MASK_FF2_LAYOUT_MAX | 21    | RFCTBD10 |L  | 1        |
    +-------------------------------+-------+----------+---+----------+

                Table 11: Recallable Object Type Assignments

   This document introduces the 'Flexible File Version 2 Layout Type
   Erasure Coding Type Registry'.  The registry uses a 32-bit value
   space partitioned into ranges based on the intended scope of the
   encoding type (see Table 12).

   +===============+=====================+============================+
   | Range         | Purpose             | Allocation Policy          |
   +===============+=====================+============================+
   | 0x0000–0x00FF | Standards Track     | IETF Review (RFC required) |
   +---------------+---------------------+----------------------------+
   | 0x0100–0x0FFF | Experimental        | Expert Review              |
   +---------------+---------------------+----------------------------+
   | 0x1000–0x7FFF | Vendor (open)       | First Come First Served    |
   +---------------+---------------------+----------------------------+
   | 0x8000–0xFFFE | Private/proprietary | No registration required   |
   +---------------+---------------------+----------------------------+
   | 0xFFFF        | Reserved            | —                          |
   +---------------+---------------------+----------------------------+

                Table 12: Erasure Coding Type Value Ranges

   Standards Track (0x0000–0x00FF)  Encoding types intended for broad
      interoperability.  The specification MUST include a complete
      mathematical description sufficient for independent interoperable
      implementations (see Section 9.1.1).  Allocated by IETF Review.

   Experimental (0x0100–0x0FFF)  Encoding types under development or
      evaluation.  An Internet-Draft is sufficient for allocation.  The
      specification SHOULD include enough detail for interoperability
      testing.  Allocated by Expert Review.

   Vendor (open) (0x1000–0x7FFF)  Encoding types with a published
      specification or patent reference.  Interoperability is expected
      among implementations that license or implement the specification.
      The registration MUST include either a math specification or a
      patent reference.  Allocated First Come First Served.

   Private/proprietary (0x8000–0xFFFE)  Encoding types for use within a
      single vendor's ecosystem.  No registration is required.
      Interoperability with other implementations is not expected.  The
      encoding type name SHOULD include an organizational identifier
      (e.g., FFV2_ENCODING_ACME_FOOBAR).  A client that encounters a
      value in this range from an unrecognized server SHOULD treat it as
      an unsupported encoding type.

   This partitioning prevents contention for small numbers in the
   Standards Track range and provides a clear signal to clients about
   what level of interoperability to expect.

   This document defines the FFV2_CODING_MIRRORED type for Client-Side
   Mirroring (see Table 13).

   +======================================+=====+========+===+========+
   | Erasure Coding Type Name             |Value|RFC     |How|Minor   |
   |                                      |     |        |   |Versions|
   +======================================+=====+========+===+========+
   | FFV2_CODING_MIRRORED                 |1    |RFCTBD10|L  |2       |
   +--------------------------------------+-----+--------+---+--------+
   | FFV2_ENCODING_MOJETTE_SYSTEMATIC     |2    |RFCTBD10|L  |2       |
   +--------------------------------------+-----+--------+---+--------+
   | FFV2_ENCODING_MOJETTE_NON_SYSTEMATIC |3    |RFCTBD10|L  |2       |
   +--------------------------------------+-----+--------+---+--------+
   | FFV2_ENCODING_RS_VANDERMONDE         |4    |RFCTBD10|L  |2       |
   +--------------------------------------+-----+--------+---+--------+

       Table 13: Flexible File Version 2 Layout Type Erasure Coding
                             Type Assignments

Implementation Status

   Note to RFC Editor: please remove this section prior to publication,
   per [RFC7942].

   This section records the implementation status of this specification
   at the time of writing.  The purpose, per [RFC7942], is to help
   reviewers evaluate the protocol against running code and to document
   which parts have been validated end-to-end versus specified on paper.

reffs (MDS and DS) and ec_demo (Client)

   Organization:  Independent / open source.

   License:  AGPL-3.0-or-later.

   Source:  https://github.com/loghyr/reffs (https://github.com/loghyr/
      reffs).

   Implementation:  reffs is an NFSv4.2 server written in C that acts as
      both a metadata server (MDS) and a data server (DS) in a Flex
      Files v2 deployment.  ec_demo is a client-side library with a
      demonstration driver that exercises the Flex Files v2 data path
      over NFSv4.2 with all three erasure-coding types defined in this
      document.

   Coverage:

   *  CHUNK_WRITE, CHUNK_READ, CHUNK_FINALIZE, and CHUNK_COMMIT (the
      happy-path data-plane operations) are implemented end-to-end and
      have been exercised against the three codec families (Reed-Solomon
      Vandermonde, Mojette systematic, Mojette non-systematic).

   *  The chunk_guard4 CAS primitive, including the conflict-detection
      and deterministic-tiebreaker rules in Section 25.1, is implemented
      on both the client and the data server.

   *  Per-chunk CRC32 integrity checking (see Section 28.1) is
      implemented end-to-end.

   *  Per-inode persistent storage of chunk state (PENDING / FINALIZED /
      COMMITTED) is implemented using write-temp / fdatasync / rename
      for crash safety.

   *  The repair data path (CHUNK_LOCK with CHUNK_LOCK_FLAGS_ADOPT,
      CHUNK_WRITE_REPAIR, CHUNK_REPAIRED, CHUNK_ROLLBACK, and
      CB_CHUNK_REPAIR) is *specified but not yet implemented* in the
      prototype.  The corresponding operations currently return
      NFS4ERR_NOTSUPP.  A fault-injection test harness is in place to
      drive the repair path once it is implemented.

   *  The tight-coupling control protocol (TRUST_STATEID,
      REVOKE_STATEID, BULK_REVOKE_STATEID) is *specified but not yet
      implemented*.  Data servers advertise loose coupling via
      ffdv_tightly_coupled = false, and synthetic AUTH_SYS credentials
      with fencing are used for access control.

   Level of maturity:  Research-quality prototype.  The implementation
      demonstrates the protocol and has produced the benchmark data
      summarised below.  It is not production-ready; in particular, it
      does not yet implement the repair path required to tolerate
      concurrent-writer races or multi-DS failure reconstruction.

   Contact:  loghyr@gmail.com.

   Last update:  April 2026.

Interoperability and Benchmarks

   The reffs + ec_demo implementation has been benchmarked against
   itself (no second Flex Files v2 implementation is known to the
   authors at the time of writing).  The benchmark suite exercises four
   I/O strategies -- plain mirroring, pure striping, Reed-Solomon
   Vandermonde, Mojette systematic, and Mojette non-systematic -- at
   five file sizes (4 KB, 16 KB, 64 KB, 256 KB, and 1 MB), at two parity
   geometries (4+2 and 8+2), and on two platforms (an Apple M4 host
   running macOS with a Rocky Linux 8.10 Docker container, and a Fedora
   43 native Linux host on aarch64).  Each data point is the mean of
   five measured runs.  Data servers run as Docker containers on a
   single-host bridge network, so absolute latency numbers reflect
   encoding and RPC fan-out cost with near-zero network latency; real
   deployments will see higher absolute values but similar overhead
   ratios.

   Selected findings:

   *  *Erasure-coded write overhead is modest at small and mid sizes.*
      At 4 KB to 64 KB payloads, all three EC codecs add 14% to 21%
      write latency relative to plain mirroring.  Above 64 KB the
      encoding cost begins to dominate; at 1 MB Reed-Solomon and Mojette
      systematic reach approximately +54%, Mojette non-systematic
      approximately +62%.

   *  *The dominant write cost is encoding, not fan-out.* A pure-
      striping variant (6 data shards, no parity) isolates the two
      costs.  At 1 MB, plain mirroring writes in 64 ms, striping in 71
      ms (+11%), Reed-Solomon in 103 ms (+60%).  Of the 39 ms Reed-
      Solomon penalty, only 7 ms comes from parallel fan-out; the
      remaining 32 ms is encoding plus two additional parity RPCs.

   *  *Reconstruction of a missing data shard is essentially free for
      systematic codecs at 4+2.* Reed-Solomon and Mojette systematic add
      1% to 6% to read latency in degraded-1 mode (one data shard
      missing, reconstructed from the remaining five).  A client that
      discovers a failed DS at read time can reconstruct transparently
      with no user-visible latency impact.

   *  *At 8+2, systematic-codec reconstruction diverges.* Mojette
      systematic reconstruction overhead stays at approximately +4% at 1
      MB, while Reed-Solomon grows to approximately +54% due to the
      O(k^2) cost of inverting a k x k matrix in GF(2^8).  Mojette
      systematic's back-projection algorithm scales with m (parity
      count) rather than k (data count) and is therefore preferable at
      wider geometries.

   *  *Mojette non-systematic applies a full inverse transform on every
      read* regardless of whether any shard is missing.  At 1 MB this
      produces approximately 4x read overhead at 4+2 and approximately
      7x at 8+2.  This codec is suitable only for write-once cold
      storage where reads are rare; it should not be the default for
      interactive workloads.

   *  *Results are platform-independent.* The largest absolute latency
      delta between macOS M4 and Fedora 43 at 1 MB is 20 ms on writes.
      Codec ordering, overhead percentages, and qualitative scaling
      behavior are reproducible across operating systems and Docker
      implementations.

   The benchmarks confirm that the protocol's central design claims hold
   in practice: client-side erasure coding is affordable at typical
   payload sizes; systematic codecs reconstruct missing shards cheaply;
   and the scaling properties of the three codec families follow
   directly from their published algorithmic complexities.

   The benchmarks also identify two non-goals for deployment: Mojette
   non-systematic is not a viable general-purpose read codec, and Reed-
   Solomon at k greater than approximately 6 loses its "reconstruction
   is free" property.  These observations inform the choice of default
   codec and geometry in implementations that consume this
   specification.

   A full benchmark report with per-size tables, figures, and the
   platform comparison is available alongside the source code.

Design Rationale: Rejected Alternatives

   The design of Flex Files v2 went through several iterations between
   2024 and 2026 that are recorded here for the benefit of future
   reviewers and implementers.  Each alternative below was considered
   and rejected, with the specific concern that led to its rejection.
   Understanding why these approaches were rejected may help reviewers
   evaluate the current design against a fuller space of possibilities
   and may guide future extensions or replacements.

Proprietary Projection Header Inside Opaque Payload

   The earliest iteration placed a 16-byte Mojette-specific header at
   the start of the READ/WRITE opaque payload, interpreted in the
   endianness of the writer's host.  This was rejected because:

   *  It embedded a specific erasure-coding type (Mojette) into the
      generic replication-method framework, preventing alternate codings
      from reusing the same wire format.

   *  The header bytes were not XDR-aligned, which required every
      implementation to handle endianness explicitly rather than relying
      on XDR's natural byte order.

   *  Carrying integrity and identification data inside an opaque
      disrespected the XDR self-description model that the rest of NFSv4
      relies on.

   The rejection of this approach at IETF 120 (July 2024) motivated the
   shift to explicit XDR-encoded chunk headers and the chunk_guard4
   structure, both visible in the wire format.

Per-Client Swap Files with MDS MAPPING_RECALL

   One proposal split logical and physical chunk addressing: the
   metadata server maintained a mapping from logical offset to physical
   location, and the client appended new chunks to a per-client staging
   file on each data server before asking the metadata server to
   atomically remap the file to the new chunks.  This was rejected
   because:

   *  The MAPPING_RECALL operation required to atomically update the
      mapping would, in a multi-writer deployment, have to recall all
      outstanding read/write layouts on the file -- grinding the
      application to a halt during every remap.

   *  Each client required its own staging file on every data server,
      producing N clients * M data servers staging files that had to be
      reconciled on client restart.

   *  The approach was biased toward correctness at the expense of
      throughput, which inverted the expected workload mix where single-
      writer cases dominate.

Server-Side Byte-Range Lock Manager per File

   Another proposal relied on byte-range locks obtained by clients
   before writing, with the lock manager state spread across the data
   servers.  This was rejected because:

   *  A failed lock holder required a lock manager to arbitrate
      recovery, effectively reintroducing a centralized decision point
      for each chunk.

   *  The lock recall path for HPC checkpoint workloads (many ranks
      writing disjoint regions) would have required thousands of locks
      per file, with recall storms on every phase transition.

   *  The design did not specify how the lock manager itself would be
      replicated for high availability, deferring the hardest part of
      the problem.

   The current design uses CHUNK_LOCK (see Section 26.5) but only on the
   repair path, not on the normal write path.

Modified Two-Touch Paxos on Each Chunk

   A fully distributed-consensus proposal placed a lightweight (modified
   two-touch) Paxos round on each chunk write, reaching agreement among
   the data servers holding the mirror set.  This was rejected because:

   *  The constant-factor cost per write (two or three round trips,
      leader election overhead, majority quorum requirement) was
      unacceptable for workloads where single-writer throughput
      dominates the deployment mix.

   *  The approach demanded that data servers be peers in a consensus
      protocol, which is a substantially heavier requirement than being
      independent chunk stores.

   *  A majority of (k+m) data servers must be reachable for any
      progress, which is a strictly stronger availability requirement
      than the k-of-(k+m) needed for erasure-coded reads.

   Working-group feedback on this proposal was uniformly negative.  The
   current design retains the option -- nothing in this specification
   prevents an implementation from running classical consensus
   internally among MDS replicas (see Section 13.5) -- but does not
   require it per write.

Automatic Commit of Empty Chunks

   An earlier version included a WRITE_BLOCK_FLAGS_COMMIT_IF_EMPTY flag
   (later renamed CHUNK_WRITE_FLAGS_ACTIVATE_IF_EMPTY) that
   automatically committed a write to a previously-empty chunk without a
   separate CHUNK_COMMIT round trip.  The flag is retained in the
   current design but its scope was narrowed: it is performant in the
   exclusive-writer case but produces blocks that cannot be rolled back
   if a racing writer appears concurrently, requiring either hole-
   punching or an extension of CHUNK_ROLLBACK to work on committed
   blocks.  The narrow scope is documented in the flag's definition; a
   broader version was rejected because it created rollback liabilities
   that were disproportionate to the single-RTT savings.

Global Clock or Wall-Clock-Based Generation Counter

   An early design used a wall-clock timestamp as the cg_gen_id.  This
   was rejected because:

   *  No global clock exists among the many clients of a multi-rack
      deployment.  Clock skew can cause a newer write to appear to have
      an earlier timestamp than an older one.

   *  Timestamps at millisecond or microsecond resolution are not fine-
      grained enough to disambiguate bursty writes from the same client.

   *  Mixing client identity bits into the low-order bits of a timestamp
      (to make it unique) reduces effective timestamp resolution without
      providing a useful total ordering.

   The current design uses a per-chunk monotonic counter scoped to the
   chunk on the data server, with cg_client_id as the disambiguator
   across clients.  See Section 25.1.

Acknowledgments

   The following from Hammerspace were instrumental in driving Flexible
   File Version 2 Layout Type: David Flynn, Trond Myklebust, Didier
   Feron, Jean-Pierre Monchanin, Pierre Evenou, and Brian Pawlowski.

   Pierre Evenou contributed the Mojette Transform encoding type
   specification, drawing on the work of Nicolas Normand, Benoit
   Parrein, and the discrete geometry research group at the University
   of Nantes.

   Christoph Helwig was instrumental in making sure the Flexible File
   Version 2 Layout Type was applicable to more than the Mojette
   Transformation.

   Chris Inacio, Brian Pawlowski, and Gorry Fairhurst guided this
   process.

References

Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119>.

   [RFC4121]  Zhu, L., Jaganathan, K., and S. Hartman, "The Kerberos
              Version 5 Generic Security Service Application Program
              Interface (GSS-API) Mechanism: Version 2", RFC 4121,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC4121, July 2005,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc4121>.

   [RFC4506]  Eisler, M., Ed., "XDR: External Data Representation
              Standard", STD 67, RFC 4506, DOI 10.17487/RFC4506, May
              2006, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc4506>.

   [RFC5531]  Thurlow, R., "RPC: Remote Procedure Call Protocol
              Specification Version 2", RFC 5531, DOI 10.17487/RFC5531,
              May 2009, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5531>.

   [RFC5662]  Shepler, S., Ed., Eisler, M., Ed., and D. Noveck, Ed.,
              "Network File System (NFS) Version 4 Minor Version 1
              External Data Representation Standard (XDR) Description",
              RFC 5662, DOI 10.17487/RFC5662, January 2010,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5662>.

   [RFC7530]  Haynes, T., Ed. and D. Noveck, Ed., "Network File System
              (NFS) Version 4 Protocol", RFC 7530, DOI 10.17487/RFC7530,
              March 2015, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7530>.

   [RFC7861]  Adamson, A. and N. Williams, "Remote Procedure Call (RPC)
              Security Version 3", RFC 7861, DOI 10.17487/RFC7861,
              November 2016, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7861>.

   [RFC7862]  Haynes, T., "Network File System (NFS) Version 4 Minor
              Version 2 Protocol", RFC 7862, DOI 10.17487/RFC7862,
              November 2016, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7862>.

   [RFC7863]  Haynes, T., "Network File System (NFS) Version 4 Minor
              Version 2 External Data Representation Standard (XDR)
              Description", RFC 7863, DOI 10.17487/RFC7863, November
              2016, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7863>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8174>.

   [RFC8178]  Noveck, D., "Rules for NFSv4 Extensions and Minor
              Versions", RFC 8178, DOI 10.17487/RFC8178, July 2017,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8178>.

   [RFC8434]  Haynes, T., "Requirements for Parallel NFS (pNFS) Layout
              Types", RFC 8434, DOI 10.17487/RFC8434, August 2018,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8434>.

   [RFC8435]  Halevy, B. and T. Haynes, "Parallel NFS (pNFS) Flexible
              File Layout", RFC 8435, DOI 10.17487/RFC8435, August 2018,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8435>.

   [RFC8881]  Noveck, D., Ed. and C. Lever, "Network File System (NFS)
              Version 4 Minor Version 1 Protocol", RFC 8881,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8881, August 2020,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8881>.

   [RFC9289]  Myklebust, T. and C. Lever, Ed., "Towards Remote Procedure
              Call Encryption by Default", RFC 9289,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC9289, September 2022,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9289>.

Informative References

   [KATZ]     Katz, M., "Questions of Uniqueness and Resolution in
              Reconstruction from Projections", Springer , 1978.

   [NORMAND]  Normand, N., Kingston, A., and P. Evenou, "A Geometry
              Driven Reconstruction Algorithm for the Mojette
              Transform", LNCS 4245, pp. 122-133, DGCI 2006, 2006.

   [PARREIN]  Parrein, B., Normand, N., and J.-P. Guedon, "Multiple
              Description Coding Using Exact Discrete Radon Transform",
              IEEE Data Compression Conference (DCC), 2001.

   [Plank97]  Plank, J., "A Tutorial on Reed-Solomon Coding for Fault-
              Tolerance in RAID-like System", September 1997.

   [RFC1813]  Callaghan, B., Pawlowski, B., and P. Staubach, "NFS
              Version 3 Protocol Specification", RFC 1813,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC1813, June 1995,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc1813>.

   [RFC4519]  Sciberras, A., Ed., "Lightweight Directory Access Protocol
              (LDAP): Schema for User Applications", RFC 4519,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC4519, June 2006,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc4519>.

   [RFC7942]  Sheffer, Y. and A. Farrel, "Improving Awareness of Running
              Code: The Implementation Status Section", BCP 205,
              RFC 7942, DOI 10.17487/RFC7942, July 2016,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7942>.

Author's Address

   Thomas Haynes
   Hammerspace
   Email: loghyr@gmail.com
